med-1	birth weight, head circumference, and prenatal exposure to acrylamide from maternal diet: the european prospective mother–child study (newgeneris)
med-2	a statistical regression model for the estimation of acrylamide concentrations in french fries for excess lifetime cancer risk assessment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3	chronic intake of potato chips in humans increases the production of reactive oxygen radicals by leukocytes and increases plasma c-reactive protein... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4	dietary patterns and breast cancer risk among women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5	empirically derived dietary patterns and risk of postmenopausal breast cancer in a large prospective cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-6	consumption of deep-fried foods and risk of prostate cancera,b
med-7	heterocyclic amines: mutagens/carcinogens produced during cooking of meat and fish. - pubmed - ncbi
med-8	acrylamide in foods: a review of the science and future considerations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-9	elevated levels of cholesterol-rich lipid rafts in cancer cells are correlated with apoptosis sensitivity induced by cholesterol-depleting agents
med-10	statin use and breast cancer survival: a nationwide cohort study from finland
med-11	statin use and risk of breast cancer: a meta-analysis of observational studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-12	beta-sitosterol enhances tamoxifen effectiveness on breast cancer cells by affecting ceramide metabolism. - pubmed - ncbi
med-13	long-term statin use and risk of ductal and lobular breast cancer among women 55-74 years of age
med-14	statin use after diagnosis of breast cancer and survival: a population-based cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-15	the garden of eden--plant based diets, the genetic drive to conserve cholesterol and its implications for heart disease in the 21st century. - pubmed - ncbi
med-16	content of low density lipoprotein receptors in breast cancer tissue related to survival of patients.
med-17	diet and breast cancer: understanding risks and benefits. - pubmed - ncbi
med-18	the association between dietary lignans, phytoestrogen-rich foods, and fiber intake and postmenopausal breast cancer risk: a german case-control st... - pubmed - ncbi
med-19	plant sterols as anticancer nutrients: evidence for their role in breast cancer
med-20	total cholesterol and cancer risk in a large prospective study in korea
med-21	vegetarian diet ameliorates symptoms of atopic dermatitis through reduction of the number of peripheral eosinophils and of pge2 synthesis by monocy... - pubmed - ncbi
med-22	vegan regimen with reduced medication in the treatment of bronchial asthma. - pubmed - ncbi
med-23	side-effect profile of cyclosporin a in patients treated for psoriasis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-24	dietary polyphenols in the prevention and treatment of allergic diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-25	manipulating antioxidant intake in asthma: a randomized controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-26	clinical efficacy of apple polyphenol for treating cedar pollinosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-27	protective effect of fruits, vegetables and the mediterranean diet on asthma and allergies among children in crete
med-28	an evaluation of the clinical efficacy of tomato extract for perennial allergic rhinitis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-29	a prospective study of diet and adult-onset asthma. - pubmed - ncbi
med-30	effect of fresh fruit consumption on lung function and wheeze in children
med-31	diet and asthma, allergic rhinoconjunctivitis and atopic eczema symptom prevalence: an ecological analysis of the international study of asthma and... - pubmed - ncbi
med-32	effect of dietary patterns on measures of lipid peroxidation: results from a randomized clinical trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-33	manipulating antioxidant intake in asthma: a randomized controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-34	lycopene-rich treatments modify noneosinophilic airway inflammation in asthma: proof of concept. - pubmed - ncbi
med-35	airway and circulating levels of carotenoids in asthma and healthy controls. - pubmed - ncbi
med-36	the association of diet with respiratory symptoms and asthma in schoolchildren in taipei, taiwan. - pubmed - ncbi
med-37	low vegetable intake is associated with allergic asthma and moderate-to-severe airway hyperresponsiveness. - pubmed - ncbi
med-38	prevalence and risk factors for self-reported asthma in an adult indian population: a cross-sectional survey
med-39	an anthroposophic lifestyle and intestinal microflora in infancy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-40	which population level environmental factors are associated with asthma, rhinoconjunctivitis and eczema? review of the ecological analyses of isaac phase one
med-41	the international study of asthma and allergies in childhood (isaac) phase three: a global synthesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-42	the effects of exclusion of dietary egg and milk in the management of asthmatic children: a pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-43	diet, infection and wheezy illness: lessons from adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-44	association of dietary soy genistein intake with lung function and asthma control: a post-hoc analysis of patients enrolled in a prospective multicentre clinical trial
med-45	effects of intestinal microflora and the environment on the development of asthma and allergy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-46	the burden of childhood asthma
med-47	food prices and blood cholesterol. - pubmed - ncbi
med-48	agricultural policies, food and public health
med-49	arsenic and lead in juice: apple, citrus, and apple-base. - pubmed - ncbi
med-50	arsenic, organic foods, and brown rice syrup
med-51	roxarsone, inorganic arsenic, and other arsenic species in chicken: a u.s.-based market basket sample
med-52	cancer and non-cancer health effects from food contaminant exposures for children and adults in california: a risk assessment
med-53	prenatal exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls and dioxins from the maternal diet may be associated with immunosuppressive effects that persist int... - pubmed - ncbi
med-54	fish intake and breastfeeding time are associated with serum concentrations of organochlorines in a swedish population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-55	environmental toxicants and the developing immune system: a missing link in the global battle against infectious disease?
med-56	prenatal exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls and dioxins is associated with increased risk of wheeze and infections in infants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-57	insights into the beneficial effect of caloric/ dietary restriction for a healthy and prolonged life
med-58	macronutrient balance and lifespan
med-59	dietary restriction, growth factors and aging: from yeast to humans
med-60	nutrient control of torc1, a cell-cycle regulator. - pubmed - ncbi
med-61	ten years of life: is it a matter of choice? - pubmed - ncbi
med-62	mtorc1 activity as a determinant of cancer risk--rationalizing the cancer-preventive effects of adiponectin, metformin, rapamycin, and low-protein ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-63	leucine signaling in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes and obesity
med-64	amino acid sensing in dietary-restriction-mediated longevity: roles of signal-transducing kinases gcn2 and tor
med-65	caloric restriction in humans: potential pitfalls and health concerns. - pubmed - ncbi
med-66	comparative and meta-analytic insights into life extension via dietary restriction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-67	the okinawan diet: health implications of a low-calorie, nutrient-dense, antioxidant-rich dietary pattern low in glycemic load. - pubmed - ncbi
med-68	insights into the beneficial effect of caloric/ dietary restriction for a healthy and prolonged life
med-69	mtor: from growth signal integration to cancer, diabetes and ageing
med-70	mtor is a key modulator of ageing and age-related disease
med-71	aging is not programmed
med-72	caloric restriction in humans: potential pitfalls and health concerns. - pubmed - ncbi
med-73	tor-driven aging: speeding car without brakes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-74	rapamycin (ay-22,989), a new antifungal antibiotic. i. taxonomy of the producing streptomycete and isolation of the active principle. - pubmed - ncbi
med-75	blood type diets lack supporting evidence: a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-76	cross-analysis of dietary prescriptions and adherence in 356 hypercholesterolaemic patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-77	the effect of inositol hexaphosphate on the expression of selected metalloproteinases and their tissue inhibitors in il-1β-stimulated colon cancer cells
med-78	high dry bean intake and reduced risk of advanced colorectal adenoma recurrence among participants in the polyp prevention trial
med-79	efficacy of ip6 + inositol in the treatment of breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy: prospective, randomized, pilot clinical study
med-80	effect of inositol hexaphosphate (ip(6)) on human normal and leukaemic haematopoietic cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-81	protection against cancer by dietary ip6 and inositol. - pubmed - ncbi
med-82	ip6: a novel anti-cancer agent. - pubmed - ncbi
med-83	the role of phytic acid in legumes: antinutrient or beneficial function? - pubmed - ncbi
med-84	effect of ip6 on human neutrophil cytokine production and cell morphology. - pubmed - ncbi
med-85	phytate in foods and significance for humans: food sources, intake, processing, bioavailability, protective role and analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-86	in vitro investigations of the potential health benefits of australian-grown faba beans (vicia faba l.): chemopreventative capacity and inhibitory ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-87	anti-angiogenic activity of inositol hexaphosphate (ip6). - pubmed - ncbi
med-88	protection against cancer by dietary ip6 and inositol. - pubmed - ncbi
med-89	cancer inhibition by inositol hexaphosphate (ip6) and inositol: from laboratory to clinic. - pubmed - ncbi
med-90	the role of phytic acid in legumes: antinutrient or beneficial function? - pubmed - ncbi
med-91	diet and colorectal cancer: a case-control study in greece. - pubmed - ncbi
med-92	dietary suppression of colonic cancer. fiber or phytate? - pubmed - ncbi
med-93	traditional non-western diets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-94	colorectal cancer and diet in an asian population--a case-control study among singapore chinese. - pubmed - ncbi
med-95	nonstarch polysaccharide consumption in four scandinavian populations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-96	dietary risk factors for colon cancer in a low-risk population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-97	systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials of the effects of low carbohydrate diets on cardiovascular risk factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-98	the effect of high-protein diets on coronary blood flow. - pubmed - ncbi
med-99	low-carbohydrate diets and all-cause mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies
med-100	negative effect of a low-carbohydrate, high-protein, high-fat diet on small peripheral artery reactivity in patients with increased cardiovascular ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-101	curcumin sensitizes tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (trail)-induced apoptosis through reactive oxygen species-mediated upre... - pubmed - ncbi
med-102	new perspectives of curcumin in cancer prevention
med-103	curcumin induces apoptosis in human melanoma cells through a fas receptor/caspase-8 pathway independent of p53. - pubmed - ncbi
med-104	fadd: a regulator of life and death. - pubmed - ncbi
med-105	curcumin-induced apoptosis of human colon cancer colo 205 cells through the production of ros, ca2+ and the activation of caspase-3. - pubmed - ncbi
med-106	curcumin and cancer cells: how many ways can curry kill tumor cells selectively?
med-107	effect of turmeric on urinary mutagens in smokers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-108	new perspectives of curcumin in cancer prevention
med-109	in vitro antimutagenicity of curcumin against environmental mutagens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-110	plant-derived health: the effects of turmeric and curcuminoids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-111	curcumin and cancer: an "old-age" disease with an "age-old" solution. - pubmed - ncbi
med-112	curcumin, a component of turmeric: from farm to pharmacy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-113	dietary turmeric potentially reduces the risk of cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-114	plant-derived health: the effects of turmeric and curcuminoids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-115	p-nonyl-phenol: an estrogenic xenobiotic released from "modified" polystyrene.
med-116	do fast foods cause asthma, rhinoconjunctivitis and eczema? global findings from the international study of asthma and allergies in childhood (isaa... - pubmed - ncbi
med-117	alkylphenols in human milk and their relations to dietary habits in central taiwan. - pubmed - ncbi
med-118	alkylphenols in human milk and their relations to dietary habits in central taiwan. - pubmed - ncbi
med-119	xeno-estrogenic compounds in precipitation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-120	nonylphenol and octylphenol in human breast milk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-121	association of dietary soy genistein intake with lung function and asthma control: a post-hoc analysis of patients enrolled in a prospective multicentre clinical trial
med-122	european bans on surfactant trigger transatlantic debate. - pubmed - ncbi
med-123	alkylphenols and alkylphenol ethoxylates contamination of crustaceans and fishes from the adriatic sea (italy). - pubmed - ncbi
med-124	effects of xenoestrogenic environmental pollutants on the proliferation of a human breast cancer cell line (mcf-7). - pubmed - ncbi
med-125	maternal meat and fat consumption during pregnancy and suspected atopic eczema in japanese infants aged 3-4 months: the osaka maternal and child he... - pubmed - ncbi
med-126	endocrine-disrupting chemicals: associated disorders and mechanisms of action
med-127	reduction in penis size and plasma testosterone concentrations in juvenile alligators living in a contaminated environment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-128	effects of intestinal microflora and the environment on the development of asthma and allergy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-129	increasing prevalence of japanese cedar pollinosis: a meta-regression analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-130	alkylphenols--potential modulators of the allergic response. - pubmed - ncbi
med-131	trends in nutritional intake and serum cholesterol levels over 40 years in tanushimaru, japanese men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-132	dietary meat and fat intake and prevalence of rhinoconjunctivitis in pregnant japanese women: baseline data from the kyushu okinawa maternal and child health study
med-133	a berry thought-provoking idea: the potential role of plant polyphenols in the treatment of age-related cognitive disorders. - pubmed - ncbi
med-134	plant foods and brain aging: a critical appraisal. - pubmed - ncbi
med-135	dietary intake of berries and flavonoids in relation to cognitive decline
med-136	blueberry supplementation improves memory in older adults
med-137	concord grape juice supplementation and neurocognitive function in human aging. - pubmed - ncbi
med-138	blueberries and neuronal aging. - pubmed - ncbi
med-139	concord grape juice supplementation improves memory function in older adults with mild cognitive impairment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-140	effects of added connective tissues on the sensory and mechanical properties of restructured beef steaks. - pubmed - ncbi
med-141	determination of microbial transglutaminase in meat and meat products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-142	comparison of the cytotoxic and mutagenic potential of liquid smoke food flavourings, cigarette smoke condensate and wood smoke condensate. - pubmed - ncbi
med-143	mutagenicity testing in the salmonella typhimurium assay of phenolic compounds and phenolic fractions obtained from smokehouse smoke condensates. - pubmed - ncbi
med-144	biological clues to potent dna-damaging activities in food and flavoring
med-145	polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in smoked food products and commercial liquid smoke flavourings. - pubmed - ncbi
med-146	commercial hickory-smoke flavouring is a human lymphoblast mutagen but does not induce lung adenomas in newborn mice. - pubmed - ncbi
med-147	the effect of blood removal on oxidation and shelf life of broiler breast meat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-148	total antioxidant capacity from diet and risk of myocardial infarction: a prospective cohort of women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-149	impaired endothelial function following a meal rich in used cooking fat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-150	atherosclerosis and oxidant stress: the end of the road for antioxidant vitamin treatment? - pubmed - ncbi
med-151	total antioxidant capacity of diet and risk of stroke: a population-based prospective cohort of women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-152	the free radical theory of aging revisited: the cell signaling disruption theory of aging
med-153	the stomach as a bioreactor: dietary lipid peroxidation in the gastric fluid and the effects of plant-derived antioxidants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-154	food-frequency questionnaire based estimates of total antioxidant capacity and risk of non-hodgkin lymphoma
med-155	role of antioxidants in cancer therapy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-156	dietary total antioxidant capacity and gastric cancer risk in the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-157	antioxidant supplements for prevention of gastrointestinal cancers: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-158	adverse effects of aromatherapy: a systematic review of case reports and case series. - pubmed - ncbi
med-159	inhalation aromatherapy during radiotherapy: results of a placebo-controlled double-blind randomized trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-160	ambient odor of orange in a dental office reduces anxiety and improves mood in female patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-161	accidental bullous phototoxic reactions to bergamot aromatherapy oil. - pubmed - ncbi
med-162	a systematic review on the anxiolytic effects of aromatherapy in people with anxiety symptoms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-163	effect of sweet orange aroma on experimental anxiety in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-164	cardiac tamponade caused by acupuncture: a review of the literature. - pubmed - ncbi
med-165	aromatherapy facts and fictions: a scientific analysis of olfactory effects on mood, physiology and behavior. - pubmed - ncbi
med-166	the role of exercise in the treatment of obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-167	physical activity energy expenditure has not declined since the 1980s and matches energy expenditures of wild mammals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-168	myths, presumptions, and facts about obesity
med-169	energy balance and obesity
med-170	increased food energy supply is more than sufficient to explain the us epidemic of obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-171	potential effect of physical activity based menu labels on the calorie content of selected fast food meals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-172	why do individuals not lose more weight from an exercise intervention at a defined dose? an energy balance analysis
med-173	health and economic burden of the projected obesity trends in the usa and the uk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-174	heart rate, rate-pressure product, and oxygen uptake during four sexual activities. - pubmed - ncbi
med-175	profits and pandemics: prevention of harmful effects of tobacco, alcohol, and ultra-processed food and drink industries. - pubmed - ncbi
med-176	conflicts of interest in approvals of additives to food determined to be generally recognized as safe: out of balance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-177	characterization of campylobacter spp. transferred from naturally contaminated chicken legs to cooked chicken slices via a cutting board. - pubmed - ncbi
med-178	reduction of faecal coliform, coliform and heterotrophic plate count bacteria in the household kitchen and bathroom by disinfection with hypochlori... - pubmed - ncbi
med-179	initial contamination of chicken parts with salmonella at retail and cross-contamination of cooked chicken with salmonella from raw chicken during ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-180	consumer knowledge of foodborne microbial hazards and food-handling practices. - pubmed - ncbi
med-181	annual cost of illness and quality-adjusted life year losses in the united states due to 14 foodborne pathogens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-182	foodnet estimate of the burden of illness caused by nontyphoidal salmonella infections in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-183	overcrowding stress decreases macrophage activity and increases salmonella enteritidis invasion in broiler chickens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-184	attribution of foodborne illnesses, hospitalizations, and deaths to food commodities by using outbreak data, united states, 1998–2008
med-185	persistence of human norovirus in reconstituted pesticides--pesticide application as a possible source of viruses in fresh produce chains. - pubmed - ncbi
med-186	epidemiology of foodborne norovirus outbreaks, united states, 2001–2008
med-187	lack of benefit of dietary advice to men with angina: results of a controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-188	global fishmeal and fish-oil supply: inputs, outputs and markets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-189	association between omega-3 fatty acid supplementation and risk of major cardiovascular disease events: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-190	efficacy of omega-3 fatty acid supplements (eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid) in the secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease: ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-191	effects of changes in fat, fish, and fibre intakes on death and myocardial reinfarction: diet and reinfarction trial (dart). - pubmed - ncbi
med-192	multivitamin-multimineral supplementation and mortality: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. - pubmed - ncbi
med-193	multivitamins in the prevention of cardiovascular disease in men: the physicians' health study ii randomized controlled trial
med-194	vitamin and mineral supplements in the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease and cancer: an updated systematic evidence review for the u.s. ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-195	facing the facelessness of public health: what's the public got to do with it? - pubmed - ncbi
med-196	western diseases and their emergence related to diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-197	the etiological significance of related diseases
med-198	the value of current nutrition information. - pubmed - ncbi
med-199	towards a new system of health: the challenge of western disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-200	milk intake in early life and risk of advanced prostate cancer
med-201	the experience of japan as a clue to the etiology of breast and ovarian cancers: relationship between death from both malignancies and dietary prac... - pubmed - ncbi
med-202	milk consumption is a risk factor for prostate cancer in western countries: evidence from cohort studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-203	milk consumption is a risk factor for prostate cancer: meta-analysis of case-control studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-204	milk stimulates growth of prostate cancer cells in culture. - pubmed - ncbi
med-205	incidence and mortality of testicular and prostatic cancers in relation to world dietary practices. - pubmed - ncbi
med-206	total and soluble oxalate content of some indian spices. - pubmed - ncbi
med-207	curcumin as "curecumin": from kitchen to clinic. - pubmed - ncbi
med-208	the effect of curcumin and placebo on human gall-bladder function: an ultrasound study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-209	clinical utility of curcumin extract. - pubmed - ncbi
med-210	the association between gout and nephrolithiasis: the national health and nutrition examination survey iii, 1988-1994. - pubmed - ncbi
med-211	plant-derived health: the effects of turmeric and curcuminoids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-212	a clinical review of different formulations of vasa (adhatoda vasica) on tamaka shwasa (asthma)
med-213	cholesterol oxides in indian ghee: possible cause of unexplained high risk of atherosclerosis in indian immigrant populations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-214	biochemical basis of enhanced drug bioavailability by piperine: evidence that piperine is a potent inhibitor of drug metabolism. - pubmed - ncbi
med-215	dietary turmeric potentially reduces the risk of cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-216	influence of piperine on the pharmacokinetics of curcumin in animals and human volunteers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-217	osteoarthritis as an inflammatory disease (osteoarthritis is not osteoarthrosis!). - pubmed - ncbi
med-218	therapeutic roles of curcumin: lessons learned from clinical trials
med-219	synovial tissue inflammation in early and late osteoarthritis
med-220	curcumin: a new paradigm and therapeutic opportunity for the treatment of osteoarthritis: curcumin for osteoarthritis management
med-221	curcumin and obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-222	efficacy and safety of curcuma domestica extracts in patients with knee osteoarthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-223	dietary polyphenols and mechanisms of osteoarthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-224	epidemiology of oa
med-225	pathobiology of obesity and osteoarthritis: integrating biomechanics and inflammation
med-226	efficacy and safety of meriva®, a curcumin-phosphatidylcholine complex, during extended administration in osteoarthritis patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-227	curcumin: getting back to the roots. - pubmed - ncbi
med-228	a randomized, pilot study to assess the efficacy and safety of curcumin in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-229	plant-derived health: the effects of turmeric and curcuminoids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-230	soy protein may alleviate osteoarthritis symptoms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-231	bioavailability of herbs and spices in humans as determined by ex vivo inflammatory suppression and dna strand breaks. - pubmed - ncbi
med-232	diverse effects of a low dose supplement of lipidated curcumin in healthy middle aged people
med-233	bioavailability of herbs and spices in humans as determined by ex vivo inflammatory suppression and dna strand breaks. - pubmed - ncbi
med-234	mechanisms of antimicrobial resistance in bacteria. - pubmed - ncbi
med-235	characterization of extended-spectrum cephalosporin-resistant salmonella enterica serovar heidelberg isolated from food animals, retail meat, and h... - pubmed - ncbi
med-236	comparison of esbl contamination in organic and conventional retail chicken meat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-237	comparison of the prevalences and antimicrobial resistances of escherichia coli isolates from different retail meats in the united states, 2002 to 2008
med-238	nearwork-induced transient myopia (nitm) and permanent myopia--is there a link? - pubmed - ncbi
med-239	variations in product choices of frequently purchased herbs: caveat emptor. - pubmed - ncbi
med-240	the effect of bilberry nutritional supplementation on night visual acuity and contrast sensitivity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-241	blueberry anthocyanins: protection against ageing and light-induced damage in retinal pigment epithelial cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-242	iris color and macular pigment optical density. - pubmed - ncbi
med-243	two-year randomized, placebo-controlled study of black currant anthocyanins on visual field in glaucoma. - pubmed - ncbi
med-244	blueberry anthocyanins: protection against ageing and light-induced damage in retinal pigment epithelial cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-245	macular pigment and risk for age-related macular degeneration in subjects from a northern european population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-246	a 12-wk egg intervention increases serum zeaxanthin and macular pigment optical density in women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-247	ultraviolet phototoxicity to the retina. - pubmed - ncbi
med-248	goji berry effects on macular characteristics and plasma antioxidant levels. - pubmed - ncbi
med-249	fasting plasma zeaxanthin response to fructus barbarum l. (wolfberry; kei tze) in a food-based human supplementation trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-250	cataract is a self-defence reaction to protect the retina from oxidative damage. - pubmed - ncbi
med-251	dietary modification of human macular pigment density. - pubmed - ncbi
med-252	antioxidant intake and primary open-angle glaucoma: a prospective study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-253	iris color and macular pigment optical density. - pubmed - ncbi
med-254	the association of consumption of fruits/vegetables with decreased risk of glaucoma among older african american women in the study of osteoporotic fractures
med-255	the association between glaucoma prevalence and supplementation with the oxidants calcium and iron
med-256	fish consumption, dietary long-chain n-3 fatty acids, and risk of type 2 diabetes
med-257	elimination half-lives of polychlorinated biphenyl congeners in children
med-258	hair-to-blood ratio and biological half-life of mercury: experimental study of methylmercury exposure through fish consumption in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-259	fish consumption during child bearing age: a quantitative risk-benefit analysis on neurodevelopment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-260	smoking and lung cancer risk in american and japanese men: an international case-control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-261	speciation of methyl- and ethyl-mercury in hair of breastfed infants acutely exposed to thimerosal-containing vaccines. - pubmed - ncbi
med-262	awareness and knowledge of methylmercury in fish in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-263	in vitro investigation of the potential immunomodulatory and anti-cancer activities of black pepper (piper nigrum) and cardamom (elettaria cardamom... - pubmed - ncbi
med-264	berry fruits for cancer prevention: current status and future prospects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-265	effect of blueberry ingestion on natural killer cell counts, oxidative stress, and inflammation prior to and after 2.5 h of running. - pubmed - ncbi
med-266	death receptor ligands in tumors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-267	immunomodulatory effects of a standardized lycium barbarum fruit juice in chinese older healthy human subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-268	homocysteine, circulating vascular cell adhesion molecule and carotid atherosclerosis in postmenopausal vegetarian women and omnivores. - pubmed - ncbi
med-269	chinese lacto-vegetarian diet exerts favorable effects on metabolic parameters, intima-media thickness, and cardiovascular risks in healthy men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-270	arterial function of carotid and brachial arteries in postmenopausal vegetarians
med-271	vitamin b-12 supplementation improves arterial function in vegetarians with subnormal vitamin b-12 status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-272	the impact of vegan diet on b-12 status in healthy omnivores: five-year prospective study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-273	radiation and chest ct scan examinations: what do we know? - pubmed - ncbi
med-274	common carotid intima-media thickness is predictive of all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in elderly community-dwelling people: longitudinal investigation for the longevity and aging in hokkaido county (lilac) study
med-275	long-term low-calorie low-protein vegan diet and endurance exercise are associated with low cardiometabolic risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-276	systematic review of the incidence of sudden cardiac death in the united states
med-277	plasma antioxidant capacity changes following a meal as a measure of the ability of a food to alter in vivo antioxidant status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-278	postprandial plasma lipid hydroperoxides: a possible link between diet and atherosclerosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-279	postprandial metabolic events and fruit-derived phenolics: a review of the science. - pubmed - ncbi
med-280	strawberry modulates ldl oxidation and postprandial lipemia in response to high-fat meal in overweight hyperlipidemic men and women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-281	plasma antioxidant capacity changes following a meal as a measure of the ability of a food to alter in vivo antioxidant status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-282	one-year study on the variation of carotenoid antioxidant substances in living human skin: influence of dietary supplementation and stress factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-283	plasma antioxidant capacity changes following a meal as a measure of the ability of a food to alter in vivo antioxidant status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-284	atherogenesis: a postprandial phenomenon. - pubmed - ncbi
med-285	glucose challenge stimulates reactive oxygen species (ros) generation by leucocytes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-286	egg consumption and the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus: a case-control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-287	egg consumption and cardiovascular disease and mortality the physicians' health study
med-288	egg consumption and the risk of diabetes in adults, jiangsu, china. - pubmed - ncbi
med-289	egg consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes in men and women
med-290	high intakes of protein and processed meat associate with increased incidence of type 2 diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-291	the role of phytic acid in legumes: antinutrient or beneficial function? - pubmed - ncbi
med-292	inositol hexakisphosphate inhibits osteoclastogenesis on raw 264.7 cells and human primary osteoclasts
med-293	bisphosphonate-associated osteonecrosis of the jaw: report of a task force of the american society for bone and mineral research. - pubmed - ncbi
med-294	effect of phytic acid on the absorption, distribution, and endogenous excretion of zinc in rats. - pubmed - ncbi
med-295	phytate (myo-inositol hexaphosphate) and risk factors for osteoporosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-296	protective effect of myo-inositol hexaphosphate (phytate) on bone mass loss in postmenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-297	the autopsy of chicken nuggets reads "chicken little". - pubmed - ncbi
med-298	toxicity and carcinogenicity studies of 4-methylimidazole in f344/n rats and b6c3f1 mice
med-299	carcinogenicity and regulation of caramel colorings. - pubmed - ncbi
med-300	the etiological significance of related diseases
med-301	methylmercury: a potential environmental risk factor contributing to epileptogenesis
med-302	fish consumption during child bearing age: a quantitative risk-benefit analysis on neurodevelopment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-303	reducing the staggering costs of environmental disease in children, estimated at $76.6 billion in 2008. - pubmed - ncbi
med-304	do national advisories serve local consumers: an assessment of mercury in economically important north carolina fish. - pubmed - ncbi
med-305	which fish should i eat? perspectives influencing fish consumption choices
med-306	sensitivity of continuous performance test (cpt) at age 14 years to developmental methylmercury exposure
med-307	functional mri approach to developmental methylmercury and polychlorinated biphenyl neurotoxicity
med-308	relationship between the prenatal exposure to low-level of mercury and the size of a newborn's cerebellum. - pubmed - ncbi
med-309	a quantitative synthesis of mercury in commercial seafood and implications for exposure in the united states
med-310	an analysis of autopsy brain tissue from infants prenatally exposed to methymercury. - pubmed - ncbi
med-311	frequent ice cream consumption is associated with reduced striatal response to receipt of an ice cream–based milkshake
med-312	effects of naltrexone on food intake and changes in subjective appetite during eating: evidence for opioid involvement in the appetizer effect. - pubmed - ncbi
med-313	obesity and addiction: neurobiological overlaps. - pubmed - ncbi
med-314	fat intake modulates cerebral blood flow in homeostatic and gustatory brain areas in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-315	does food addiction exist? a phenomenological discussion based on the psychiatric classification of substance-related disorders and addiction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-316	cue-induced cocaine craving: neuroanatomical specificity for drug users and drug stimuli. - pubmed - ncbi
med-317	changes in brain activation associated with reward processing in smokers and nonsmokers. a positron emission tomography study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-318	implications from addiction research towards the understanding and treatment of obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-319	brain functional magnetic resonance imaging response to glucose and fructose infusions in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-320	the neural correlates of “food addiction”
med-321	brain pet imaging in obesity and food addiction: current evidence and hypothesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-322	food and drug reward: overlapping circuits in human obesity and addiction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-323	prevalence and public health significance of aluminum residues in milk and some dairy products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-324	hidden sources of phosphorus in the typical american diet: does it matter in nephrology? - pubmed - ncbi
med-325	phosphorus containing food additives and the accuracy of nutrient databases: implications for renal patients
med-326	dietary phosphorus restriction in dialysis patients: potential impact of processed meat, poultry, and fish products as protein sources. - pubmed - ncbi
med-327	effects of polyphosphate additives on campylobacter survival in processed chicken exudates
med-328	lack of awareness among future medical professionals about the risk of consuming hidden phosphate-containing processed food and drinks
med-329	phosphate is a vascular toxin. - pubmed - ncbi
med-330	dietary phosphorus acutely impairs endothelial function
med-331	effects of polyphosphate additives on the ph of processed chicken exudates and the survival of campylobacter. - pubmed - ncbi
med-332	public health impact of dietary phosphorus excess on bone and cardiovascular health in the general population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-333	phosphate additives in food—a health risk
med-334	differences among total and in vitro digestible phosphorus content of plant foods and beverages. - pubmed - ncbi
med-335	differences among total and in vitro digestible phosphorus content of meat and milk products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-336	extra-phosphate load from food additives in commonly eaten foods: a real and insidious danger for renal patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-337	descriptive sensory analysis of broiler breast fillets marinated in phosphate, salt, and acid solutions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-338	you ahr what you eat: linking diet and immunity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-339	camel urine inhibits the cytochrome p450 1a1 gene expression through an ahr-dependent mechanism in hepa 1c1c7 cell line. - pubmed - ncbi
med-340	the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and its xenobiotic ligands: a fundamental trigger for cardiovascular diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-341	flavones and flavonols at dietary levels inhibit a transformation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor induced by dioxin. - pubmed - ncbi
med-342	biology and function of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor: report of an international and interdisciplinary conference. - pubmed - ncbi
med-343	intraepithelial lymphocytes: to serve and protect
med-344	iels: enforcing law and order in the court of the intestinal epithelium. - pubmed - ncbi
med-345	the aryl hydrocarbon receptor in inflammatory bowel disease: linking the environment to disease pathogenesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-346	epithelial barrier biology: good fences make good neighbours
med-347	you ahr what you eat: linking diet and immunity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-348	biology and function of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor: report of an international and interdisciplinary conference. - pubmed - ncbi
med-349	americans do not meet federal dietary recommendations
med-350	can soy phytoestrogens decrease dna methylation in brca1 and brca2 oncosuppressor genes in breast cancer? - pubmed - ncbi
med-351	soy food intake after diagnosis of breast cancer and survival: an in-depth analysis of combined evidence from cohort studies of us and chinese women
med-352	legumes: the most important dietary predictor of survival in older people of different ethnicities. - pubmed - ncbi
med-353	study on soy isoflavone consumption and risk of breast cancer and survival. - pubmed - ncbi
med-354	positive effects of soy isoflavone food on survival of breast cancer patients in china. - pubmed - ncbi
med-355	cpg island tumor suppressor promoter methylation in non-brca-associated early mammary carcinogenesis
med-356	brca1-methylated sporadic breast cancers are brca-like in showing a basal phenotype and absence of er expression. - pubmed - ncbi
med-357	influence of frequent and long-term bean consumption on colonic function and fermentation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-358	perceptions of flatulence from bean consumption among adults in 3 feeding studies
med-359	a bean-free diet increases the risk of all-cause mortality among taiwanese women: the role of the metabolic syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-360	legumes: the most important dietary predictor of survival in older people of different ethnicities. - pubmed - ncbi
med-361	poppy seed foods and opiate drug testing--where are we today? - pubmed - ncbi
med-362	morphine levels in urine subsequent to poppy seed consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-363	sympathetic nervous system activity and resting metabolic rate in vegetarians. - pubmed - ncbi
med-364	four therapeutic diets: adherence and acceptability. - pubmed - ncbi
med-365	a vegetarian dietary pattern as a nutrient-dense approach to weight management: an analysis of the national health and nutrition examination survey... - pubmed - ncbi
med-366	do circulating leucocytes and lymphocyte subtypes increase in response to brief exercise in children with and without asthma?
med-367	baker's yeast β-glucan supplementation increases monocytes and cytokines post-exercise: implications for infection risk? - pubmed - ncbi
med-368	effect of beta 1, 3/1, 6 glucan on upper respiratory tract infection symptoms and mood state in marathon athletes
med-369	endurance exercise results in dna damage as detected by the comet assay. - pubmed - ncbi
med-370	antioxidants prevent health-promoting effects of physical exercise in humans
med-371	short-term blackcurrant extract consumption modulates exercise-induced oxidative stress and lipopolysaccharide-stimulated inflammatory responses. - pubmed - ncbi
med-372	can nutrition limit exercise-induced immunodepression? - pubmed - ncbi
med-373	effect of vitamin c supplements on physical performance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-374	inhibition of xanthine oxidase by flavonoids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-375	exercise-induced oxidative stress:myths, realities and physiological relevance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-376	could a vegetarian diet reduce exercise-induced oxidative stress? a review of the literature. - pubmed - ncbi
med-377	free radicals in skin and muscle: damaging agents or signals for adaptation? - pubmed - ncbi
med-378	effect of lemon verbena supplementation on muscular damage markers, proinflammatory cytokines release and neutrophils' oxidative stress in chronic ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-379	the effect of acute pre-exercise dark chocolate consumption on plasma antioxidant status, oxidative stress and immunoendocrine responses to prolong... - pubmed - ncbi
med-380	flavonoid glycosides isolated from unique legume plant extracts as novel inhibitors of xanthine oxidase
med-381	influence of tart cherry juice on indices of recovery following marathon running. - pubmed - ncbi
med-382	clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and treatment of neurocysticercosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-383	calcified neurocysticercosis among patients with primary headache. - pubmed - ncbi
med-384	neurocysticercosis and oncogenesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-385	psychiatric manifestations of neurocysticercosis: a study of 38 patients from a neurology clinic in brazil.
med-386	the impact of neurocysticercosis in california: a review of hospitalized cases
med-387	neurocysticercosis in pregnancy: not just another headache. - pubmed - ncbi
med-388	is dementia reversible in patients with neurocysticercosis?
med-389	a review of cases of human cysticercosis in canada. - pubmed - ncbi
med-390	detection of increased choline compounds with proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy subsequent to malignant transformation of human prosta... - pubmed - ncbi
med-391	choline intake and risk of lethal prostate cancer: incidence and survival
med-392	intakes of meat, fish, poultry, and eggs and risk of prostate cancer progression
med-393	egg, red meat, and poultry intake and risk of lethal prostate cancer in the prostate specific antigen-era: incidence and survival
med-394	gut flora metabolism of phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease
med-395	choline and betaine intake and the risk of colorectal cancer in men
med-396	beef in an optimal lean diet study: effects on lipids, lipoproteins, and apolipoproteins
med-397	cheese intake in large amounts lowers ldl-cholesterol concentrations compared with butter intake of equal fat content. - pubmed - ncbi
med-398	the grapefruit: an old wine in a new glass? metabolic and cardiovascular perspectives
med-399	prospective study of grapefruit intake and risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women: the multiethnic cohort study
med-400	effects of grapefruit, grapefruit juice and water preloads on energy balance, weight loss, body composition, and cardiometabolic risk in free-living obese adults
med-401	inhibitory effect of grapefruit juice and its bitter principal, naringenin, on cyp1a2 dependent metabolism of caffeine in man.
med-402	red grapefruit positively influences serum triglyceride level in patients suffering from coronary atherosclerosis: studies in vitro and in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-403	can grapefruit juice influence ethinylestradiol bioavailability? - pubmed - ncbi
med-404	alkaline diets favor lean tissue mass in older adults
med-405	effect of urine ph changed by dietary intervention on uric acid clearance mechanism of ph-dependent excretion of urinary uric acid. - pubmed - ncbi
med-406	nutrient based estimation of acid-base balance in vegetarians and non-vegetarians. - pubmed - ncbi
med-407	age and systemic acid-base equilibrium: analysis of published data. - pubmed - ncbi
med-408	diet-induced metabolic acidosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-409	hypercalciuria associated with high dietary protein intake is not due to acid load
med-410	the impact of dietary protein on calcium absorption and kinetic measures of bone turnover in women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-411	estimated net acid excretion inversely correlates with urine ph in vegans, lacto-ovo vegetarians, and omnivores. - pubmed - ncbi
med-412	protein intake, calcium balance and health consequences. - pubmed - ncbi
med-413	dietary acid load is associated with lower bone mineral density in men with low intake of dietary calcium
med-414	a diet high in meat protein and potential renal acid load increases fractional calcium absorption and urinary calcium excretion without affecting m... - pubmed - ncbi
med-415	dietary protein and bone health: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-416	diet-induced metabolic acidosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-417	vegetable intake is associated with reduced breast cancer recurrence in tamoxifen users: a secondary analysis from the women's healthy eating and l... - pubmed - ncbi
med-418	significant changes in dietary intake and supplement use after breast cancer diagnosis in a uk multicentre study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-419	macronutrient intake and risk of urothelial cell carcinoma in the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-420	a novel measure of dietary change in a prostate cancer dietary program incorporating mindfulness training
med-421	intakes of meat, fish, poultry, and eggs and risk of prostate cancer progression
med-422	vegetable and fruit intake after diagnosis and risk of prostate cancer progression
med-423	intensive lifestyle changes may affect the progression of prostate cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-424	improvement of endothelium-dependent coronary vasodilation after a single ldl apheresis in patients with hypercholesterolemia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-425	association between use of interferon beta and progression of disability in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-426	evidence report: the efficacy and safety of mitoxantrone (novantrone) in the treatment of multiple sclerosis
med-427	retinal arterial changes correlate with cerebral small-vessel disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-428	effect of low saturated fat diet in early and late cases of multiple sclerosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-429	relation of serum lipoprotein levels and systolic blood pressure to early atherosclerosis. the bogalusa heart study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-430	pathobiological determinants of atherosclerosis in youth risk scores are associated with early and advanced atherosclerosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-431	the low-methionine content of vegan diets may make methionine restriction feasible as a life extension strategy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-432	a review of methionine dependency and the role of methionine restriction in cancer growth control and life-span extension. - pubmed - ncbi
med-433	lowered methionine ingestion as responsible for the decrease in rodent mitochondrial oxidative stress in protein and dietary restriction possible i... - pubmed - ncbi
med-434	a review of methionine dependency and the role of methionine restriction in cancer growth control and life-span extension. - pubmed - ncbi
med-435	expression of the biochemical defect of methionine dependence in fresh patient tumors in primary histoculture. - pubmed - ncbi
med-436	can dietary methionine restriction increase the effectiveness of chemotherapy in treatment of advanced cancer? - pubmed - ncbi
med-437	sniffer dogs as part of a bimodal bionic research approach to develop a lung cancer screening
med-438	colorectal cancer screening with odour material by canine scent detection
med-439	olfactory detection of human bladder cancer by dogs: proof of principle study
med-440	the effect of replacement of methionine by homocystine on survival of malignant and normal adult mammalian cells in culture
med-441	generation of gaseous sulfur-containing compounds in tumour tissue and suppression of gas diffusion as an antitumour treatment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-442	occupation and risk of lymphoma: a multicentre prospective cohort study (epic). - pubmed - ncbi
med-443	farming, growing up on a farm, and haematological cancer mortality. - pubmed - ncbi
med-444	mortality in workers employed in pig abattoirs and processing plants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-445	an outbreak of neurological autoimmunity with polyradiculoneuropathy in workers exposed to aerosolised porcine neural tissue: a descriptive study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-446	cancer mortality in workers employed in cattle, pigs, and sheep slaughtering and processing plants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-447	the restriction of zoonotic perv transmission by human apobec3g
med-448	auto-immune polyradiculoneuropathy and a novel igg biomarker in workers exposed to aerosolized porcine brain. - pubmed - ncbi
med-449	emerging and re-emerging swine viruses. - pubmed - ncbi
med-450	industrial hygiene assessment of reticuloendotheliosis viruses exposure in the poultry industry. - pubmed - ncbi
med-451	cancer and noncancer mortality among american seafood workers
med-452	occupational exposure assessment using antibody levels: exposure to avian leukosis/sarcoma viruses in the poultry industry. - pubmed - ncbi
med-453	a pilot case-cohort study of liver and pancreatic cancers in poultry workers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-454	non-occupational malignant pleural mesothelioma due to asbestos and non-asbestos fibres. - pubmed - ncbi
med-455	third wave of asbestos-related disease from secondary use of asbestos. a case report from industry. - pubmed - ncbi
med-456	a new type of hypersensitivity pneumonitis: salami brusher's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-457	synergism of alcohol, diabetes, and viral hepatitis on the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in blacks and whites in the u.s. - pubmed - ncbi
med-458	cigarette smoking and pancreatic cancer: a pooled analysis from the pancreatic cancer cohort consortium
med-459	occupational toxicology of asbestos-related malignancies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-460	appealing to vanity: could potential appearance improvement motivate fruit and vegetable consumption?
med-461	the color red reduces snack food and soft drink intake. - pubmed - ncbi
med-462	lip colour affects perceived sex typicality and attractiveness of human faces. - pubmed - ncbi
med-463	you are what you eat: within-subject increases in fruit and vegetable consumption confer beneficial skin-color changes
med-464	are free fatty acids effective taste stimuli in humans? presented at the symposium "the taste for fat: new discoveries on the role of fat in sensor... - pubmed - ncbi
med-465	effect of dietary sodium restriction on taste responses to sodium chloride: a longitudinal study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-466	desire to eat high- and low-fat foods following a low-fat dietary intervention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-467	oral sensitivity to oleic acid is associated with fat intake and body mass index. - pubmed - ncbi
med-468	recent fat intake modulates fat taste sensitivity in lean and overweight subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-469	hiding vegetables to reduce energy density: an effective strategy to increase children's vegetable intake and reduce energy intake
med-470	hiding vegetables to reduce energy density: an effective strategy to increase children's vegetable intake and reduce energy intake
med-471	serving styles of raw snack vegetables. what do children want? - pubmed - ncbi
med-472	associations of parenting styles, parental feeding practices and child characteristics with young children's fruit and vegetable consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-473	"split them!" smaller item sizes of cookies lead to a decrease in energy intake in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-474	offering “dip” promotes intake of a moderately-liked raw vegetable among preschoolers with genetic sensitivity to bitterness. - pubmed - ncbi
med-475	attractive names sustain increased vegetable intake in schools. - pubmed - ncbi
med-476	"split them!" smaller item sizes of cookies lead to a decrease in energy intake in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-477	brain cancer associated with environmental lead exposure: evidence from implementation of a national petrol-lead phase-out program (plpop) in taiwa... - pubmed - ncbi
med-478	artificial food dyes and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. - pubmed - ncbi
med-479	food additives and hyperactive behaviour in 3-year-old and 8/9-year-old children in the community: a randomised, double-blinded, placebo-controlled... - pubmed - ncbi
med-480	dietary sensitivities and adhd symptoms: thirty-five years of research. - pubmed - ncbi
med-481	the effects of physical activity on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder symptoms: the evidence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-482	trends of outpatient prescription drug utilization in us children, 2002-2010. - pubmed - ncbi
med-483	popcorn-worker lung caused by corporate and regulatory negligence: an avoidable tragedy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-484	bronchiolitis obliterans and consumer exposure to butter-flavored microwave popcorn: a case series. - pubmed - ncbi
med-485	the link between erectile and cardiovascular health: the canary in the coal mine. - pubmed - ncbi
med-486	lifestyle/dietary recommendations for erectile dysfunction and female sexual dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-487	mediterranean diet improves erectile function in subjects with the metabolic syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-488	erectile dysfunction and risk of cardiovascular disease: meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-489	risk factors for mortality in the nurses’ health study: a competing risks analysis
med-490	oral sildenafil citrate (viagra) for erectile dysfunction: a systematic review and meta-analysis of harms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-491	are phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors associated with vision-threatening adverse events? a critical analysis and review of the literature. - pubmed - ncbi
med-492	pistachio diet improves erectile function parameters and serum lipid profiles in patients with erectile dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-493	mediterranean diet improves erectile function in subjects with the metabolic syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-494	adherence to mediterranean diet and sexual function in women with type 2 diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-495	how to save a life during a clinic visit for erectile dysfunction by modifying cardiovascular risk factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-496	subclinical endothelial dysfunction and low-grade inflammation play roles in the development of erectile dysfunction in young men with low risk of ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-497	the link between erectile and cardiovascular health: the canary in the coal mine. - pubmed - ncbi
med-498	the effect of lifestyle modification and cardiovascular risk factor reduction on erectile dysfunction: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-499	how to save a life during a clinic visit for erectile dysfunction by modifying cardiovascular risk factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-500	penile doppler ultrasound in patients with erectile dysfunction (ed): role of peak systolic velocity measured in the flaccid state in predicting ar... - pubmed - ncbi
med-501	heart disease risk factors predict erectile dysfunction 25 years later: the rancho bernardo study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-502	the link between erectile and cardiovascular health: the canary in the coal mine. - pubmed - ncbi
med-503	the artery size hypothesis: a macrovascular link between erectile dysfunction and coronary artery disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-504	erectile dysfunction prevalence, time of onset and association with risk factors in 300 consecutive patients with acute chest pain and angiographic... - pubmed - ncbi
med-505	erectile dysfunction and coronary disease: evaluating the link. - pubmed - ncbi
med-506	a population-based, longitudinal study of erectile dysfunction and future coronary artery disease
med-507	could dietary seaweed reverse the metabolic syndrome? - pubmed - ncbi
med-508	iodine and thyroid cancer risk among women in a multiethnic population: the bay area thyroid cancer study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-509	marine edible algae as disease preventers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-510	an epidemiologic study of thyroid cancer in hawaii. - pubmed - ncbi
med-511	dietary seaweed modifies estrogen and phytoestrogen metabolism in healthy postmenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-512	a case-control study on seaweed consumption and the risk of breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-513	seaweed prevents breast cancer? - pubmed - ncbi
med-514	seaweed consumption and the risk of thyroid cancer in women: the japan public health center-based prospective study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-515	endurance exercise results in dna damage as detected by the comet assay. - pubmed - ncbi
med-516	exercise-induced lipid peroxidation: implications for deoxyribonucleic acid damage and systemic free radical generation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-517	acute and chronic watercress supplementation attenuates exercise-induced peripheral mononuclear cell dna damage and lipid peroxidation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-518	antigenotoxic activity of watercress extract in an in vitro mammalian system using comet assay. - pubmed - ncbi
med-519	exercise-induced oxidative stress:myths, realities and physiological relevance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-520	oxidative dna damage in human peripheral leukocytes induced by massive aerobic exercise. - pubmed - ncbi
med-521	does physical activity induce dna damage? - pubmed - ncbi
med-522	could a vegetarian diet reduce exercise-induced oxidative stress? a review of the literature. - pubmed - ncbi
med-523	supplementation with vitamin c and n-acetyl-cysteine increases oxidative stress in humans after an acute muscle injury induced by eccentric exercise. - pubmed - ncbi
med-524	efficacy of a tart cherry juice blend in preventing the symptoms of muscle damage
med-525	consumption of bing sweet cherries lowers circulating concentrations of inflammation markers in healthy men and women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-526	massage therapy attenuates inflammatory signaling after exercise-induced muscle damage. - pubmed - ncbi
med-527	effect of blueberry ingestion on natural killer cell counts, oxidative stress, and inflammation prior to and after 2.5 h of running. - pubmed - ncbi
med-528	acute inflammation: the underlying mechanism in delayed onset muscle soreness? - pubmed - ncbi
med-529	influence of tart cherry juice on indices of recovery following marathon running. - pubmed - ncbi
med-530	orange juice improved lipid profile and blood lactate of overweight middle-aged women subjected to aerobic training. - pubmed - ncbi
med-531	postprandial glycemic response to orange juice and nondiet cola: is there a difference? - pubmed - ncbi
med-532	pancreatic lipase inhibitors from natural sources: unexplored potential. - pubmed - ncbi
med-533	hdl-cholesterol-raising effect of orange juice in subjects with hypercholesterolemia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-534	fruit and vegetable intake in relation to risk of ischemic stroke. - pubmed - ncbi
med-535	bioavailability of orally administered water-dispersible hesperetin and its effect on peripheral vasodilatation in human subjects: implication of e... - pubmed - ncbi
med-536	hesperidin displays relevant role in the nutrigenomic effect of orange juice on blood leukocytes in human volunteers: a randomized controlled cross-over study
med-537	flavonoids and cancer prevention: a review of the evidence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-538	phytonutrient intake by adults in the united states in relation to fruit and vegetable consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-539	hesperidin contributes to the vascular protective effects of orange juice: a randomized crossover study in healthy volunteers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-540	united states pharmacopeia safety evaluation of spirulina. - pubmed - ncbi
med-541	effects of a natural extract of (-)-hydroxycitric acid (hca-sx) and a combination of hca-sx plus niacin-bound chromium and gymnema sylvestre extrac... - pubmed - ncbi
med-542	science of weight loss supplements: compromised by conflicts of interest?
med-543	acute hepatotoxicity after ingestion of morinda citrifolia (noni berry) juice in a 14-year-old boy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-544	aloe-induced toxic hepatitis
med-545	an herbal supplement containing ma huang-guarana for weight loss: a randomized, double-blind trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-546	science in liquid dietary supplement promotion: the misleading case of mangosteen juice
med-547	hepatotoxicity due to hydroxycut®: a case series
med-548	reducing the fat content in ground beef without sacrificing quality: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-549	carrageenan induces interleukin-8 production through distinct bcl10 pathway in normal human colonic epithelial cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-550	pro-inflammatory nf-κb and early growth response gene 1 regulate epithelial barrier disruption by food additive carrageenan in human intestinal epi... - pubmed - ncbi
med-551	evaluation of certain food additives and contaminants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-552	review of harmful gastrointestinal effects of carrageenan in animal experiments.
med-553	carrageenan induces cell cycle arrest in human intestinal epithelial cells in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-554	nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for primary dysmenorrhoea. - pubmed - ncbi
med-555	surgical interruption of pelvic nerve pathways in dysmenorrhea: a systematic review of effectiveness. - pubmed - ncbi
med-556	diet and sex-hormone binding globulin, dysmenorrhea, and premenstrual symptoms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-557	dysmenorrhea. - pubmed - ncbi
med-558	postinfectious functional gastrointestinal disorders. - pubmed - ncbi
med-559	editorial: from the acute infection to the chronic disorder "don't worry it's just a viral gastroenteritis". - pubmed - ncbi
med-560	a risk-benefit assessment of cisapride in the treatment of gastrointestinal disorders. - pubmed - ncbi
med-561	effect of red pepper on symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome: preliminary study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-562	altered rectal sensory response induced by balloon distention in patients with functional abdominal pain syndrome
med-563	the role of nerve blocks and botulinum toxin injections in the management of cluster headaches. - pubmed - ncbi
med-564	secretion, pain and sneezing induced by the application of capsaicin to the nasal mucosa in man.
med-565	preventative effect of repeated nasal applications of capsaicin in cluster headache. - pubmed - ncbi
med-566	melatonin in traditional mediterranean diets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-567	effect of tart cherry juice (prunus cerasus) on melatonin levels and enhanced sleep quality. - pubmed - ncbi
med-568	application of lc and lc-ms to the analysis of melatonin and serotonin in edible plants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-569	effects of a tart cherry juice beverage on the sleep of older adults with insomnia: a pilot study
med-570	diet promotes sleep duration and quality. - pubmed - ncbi
med-571	melatonin for the prevention and treatment of jet lag. - pubmed - ncbi
med-572	effect of kiwifruit consumption on sleep quality in adults with sleep problems. - pubmed - ncbi
med-573	epidemiology of insomnia: what we know and what we still need to learn. - pubmed - ncbi
med-574	short or long sleep duration is associated with memory impairment in older chinese: the guangzhou biobank cohort study
med-575	effect of kiwifruit consumption on sleep quality in adults with sleep problems. - pubmed - ncbi
med-576	association of sleep duration with mortality from cardiovascular disease and other causes for japanese men and women: the jacc study
med-577	restriction of meat, fish, and poultry in omnivores improves mood: a pilot randomized controlled trial
med-578	natural mood foods: the actions of polyphenols against psychiatric and cognitive disorders
med-579	frequent consumption of vegetables predicts lower risk of depression in older taiwanese - results of a prospective population-based study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-580	elevated monoamine oxidase a levels in the brain: an explanation for the monoamine imbalance of major depression. - pubmed - ncbi
med-581	monoamine oxidase inhibitors and the cheese effect. - pubmed - ncbi
med-582	dietary inhibitors of monoamine oxidase a. - pubmed - ncbi
med-583	monoamine theories of depression: historical impact on biomedical research. - pubmed - ncbi
med-584	fisetin inhibits various attributes of angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo--implications for angioprevention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-585	tumor angiogenesis as a target for dietary cancer prevention
med-586	modulation of angiogenesis by dietary phytoconstituents in the prevention and intervention of breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-587	a wholly nutritional 'multifocal angiostatic therapy' for control of disseminated cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-588	phytochemicals and cancer risk: a review of the epidemiological evidence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-589	healthy lifestyle on the risk of breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-590	greater survival after breast cancer in physically active women with high vegetable-fruit intake regardless of obesity
med-591	is concordance with world cancer research fund/american institute for cancer research guidelines for cancer prevention related to subsequent risk o... - pubmed - ncbi
med-592	high prevalence of oncogenic hpv-16 in cervical smears of asymptomatic women of eastern uttar pradesh, india: a population-based study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-593	vegetarian diets and the incidence of cancer in a low-risk population
med-594	vitamin a, carotenoids, and risk of persistent oncogenic human papillomavirus infection. - pubmed - ncbi
med-595	food animals and antimicrobials: impacts on human health
med-596	a higher ratio of beans to white rice is associated with lower cardiometabolic risk factors in costa rican adults
med-597	the spermicidal potency of coca-cola and pepsi-cola. - pubmed - ncbi
med-598	dietary fat and semen quality among men attending a fertility clinic
med-599	heavy metals in commercial fish in new jersey. - pubmed - ncbi
med-600	a prospective study of intake of trans-fatty acids from ruminant fat, partially hydrogenated vegetable oils, and marine oils and mortality from cvd. - pubmed - ncbi
med-601	trans fat consumption and aggression
med-602	protective effect of zingerone, a dietary compound against radiation induced genetic damage and apoptosis in human lymphocytes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-603	effects of melissa officinalis l. on oxidative status and dna damage in subjects exposed to long-term low-dose ionizing radiation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-604	high dietary antioxidant intakes are associated with decreased chromosome translocation frequency in airline pilots
med-605	dietary factors and cancer mortality among atomic-bomb survivors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-606	dietary and clastogenic factors in children who immigrated to israel from regions contaminated by the chernobyl accident. - pubmed - ncbi
med-607	the use of dental radiographs: update and recommendations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-608	dental x-rays and risk of meningioma
med-609	estimated risks of radiation-induced fatal cancer from pediatric ct. - pubmed - ncbi
med-610	informed consent and communication of risk from radiological and nuclear medicine examinations: how to escape from a communication inferno
med-611	increase of 210po levels in human semen fluid after mussel ingestion. - pubmed - ncbi
med-612	an unexpected mortality increase in the united states follows arrival of the radioactive plume from fukushima: is there a correlation? - pubmed - ncbi
med-613	pacific bluefin tuna transport fukushima-derived radionuclides from japan to california
med-614	cigarette smoke radioactivity and lung cancer risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-615	differences in microbiological composition of saliva and dental plaque in subjects with different drinking habits. - pubmed - ncbi
med-616	oral consumption of cranberry juice cocktail inhibits molecular-scale adhesion of clinical uropathogenic escherichia coli
med-617	cranberries for preventing urinary tract infections. - pubmed - ncbi
med-618	genetic evidence supporting the fecal-perineal-urethral hypothesis in cystitis caused by escherichia coli. - pubmed - ncbi
med-619	the effectiveness of hygiene procedures for prevention of cross-contamination from chicken carcases in the domestic kitchen. - pubmed - ncbi
med-620	multidrug-resistant extraintestinal pathogenic escherichia coli of sequence type st131 in animals and foods. - pubmed - ncbi
med-621	chicken as reservoir for extraintestinal pathogenic escherichia coli in humans, canada
med-622	bacterial vaginosis is associated with variation in dietary indices
med-623	lavender essential oil in the treatment of migraine headache: a placebo-controlled clinical trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-624	the effects of lavender oil inhalation on emotional states, autonomic nervous system, and brain electrical activity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-625	sensing an improvement: an experimental study to evaluate the use of aromatherapy, massage and periods of rest in an intensive care unit. - pubmed - ncbi
med-626	prepubertal gynecomastia linked to lavender and tea tree oils. - pubmed - ncbi
med-627	a multi-center, double-blind, randomised study of the lavender oil preparation silexan in comparison to lorazepam for generalized anxiety disorder. - pubmed - ncbi
med-628	investigating the role of perceived stress on bacterial flora activity and salivary cortisol secretion: a possible mechanism underlying susceptibil... - pubmed - ncbi
med-629	assessment of psychotropic-like properties of a probiotic formulation (lactobacillus helveticus r0052 and bifidobacterium longum r0175) in rats and... - pubmed - ncbi
med-630	the impact of meals on a probiotic during transit through a model of the human upper gastrointestinal tract. - pubmed - ncbi
med-631	probiotics for preventing acute upper respiratory tract infections. - pubmed - ncbi
med-632	systemic immunity-enhancing effects in healthy subjects following dietary consumption of the lactic acid bacterium lactobacillus rhamnosus hn001. - pubmed - ncbi
med-633	caesarean delivery and risk of atopy and allergic disease: meta-analyses. - pubmed - ncbi
med-634	microbiological evaluation of commercial probiotic products available in the usa in 2009. - pubmed - ncbi
med-635	probiotics as prevention and treatment for diarrhea. - pubmed - ncbi
med-636	recurrent clostridium difficile colitis: case series involving 18 patients treated with donor stool administered via a nasogastric tube. - pubmed - ncbi
med-637	dietary intake of agaricus bisporus white button mushroom accelerates salivary immunoglobulin a secretion in healthy volunteers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-638	differences in antioxidant levels of fresh, frozen and freeze-dried strawberries and strawberry jam. - pubmed - ncbi
med-639	inhibition of the growth of premalignant and malignant human oral cell lines by extracts and components of black raspberries. - pubmed - ncbi
med-640	topical application of a bioadhesive black raspberry gel modulates gene expression and reduces cyclooxygenase 2 protein in human premalignant oral lesions
med-641	dietary fat and meat intakes and risk of reflux esophagitis, barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma
med-642	strawberry fields forever? - pubmed - ncbi
med-643	randomized phase ii trial of lyophilized strawberries in patients with dysplastic precancerous lesions of the esophagus. - pubmed - ncbi
med-644	dietary patterns and the risk of esophageal cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-645	dietary patterns and risk of oesophageal cancers: a population-based case-control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-646	cranberries: ripe for more cancer research? - pubmed - ncbi
med-647	habitual intake of flavonoid subclasses and incident hypertension in adults
med-648	a duty to deceive: placebos in clinical practice. - pubmed - ncbi
med-649	controlled trial of megestrol acetate for the treatment of cancer anorexia and cachexia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-650	general practice consultations: is there any point in being positive?
med-651	moderate alcohol consumption during adult life, drinking patterns, and breast cancer risk
med-652	a single sip of a strong alcoholic beverage causes exposure to carcinogenic concentrations of acetaldehyde in the oral cavity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-653	salivary acetaldehyde increase due to alcohol-containing mouthwash use: a risk factor for oral cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-654	what is the cell hydration status of healthy children in the usa? preliminary data on urine osmolality and water intake. - pubmed - ncbi
med-655	should children drink more water?: the effects of drinking water on cognition in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-656	effects of drinking supplementary water at school on cognitive performance in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-657	does having a drink help you think? 6-7-year-old children show improvements in cognitive performance from baseline to test after having a drink of ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-658	egg, red meat, and poultry intake and risk of lethal prostate cancer in the prostate specific antigen-era: incidence and survival
med-659	choline intake and risk of lethal prostate cancer: incidence and survival
med-660	intakes of meat, fish, poultry, and eggs and risk of prostate cancer progression
med-661	intestinal microbiota metabolism of l-carnitine, a nutrient in red meat, promotes atherosclerosis
med-662	effect of flax seed ingestion on the menstrual cycle. - pubmed - ncbi
med-663	vegetarian vs nonvegetarian diets, dietary restraint, and subclinical ovulatory disturbances: prospective 6-mo study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-664	effect of a low-fat high-carbohydrate diet on symptoms of cyclical mastopathy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-665	diet and sex-hormone binding globulin, dysmenorrhea, and premenstrual symptoms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-666	is there a role for surgery in the treatment of mastalgia? - pubmed - ncbi
med-667	artemisia dracunculus l. (tarragon): a critical review of its traditional use, chemical composition, pharmacology, and safety. - pubmed - ncbi
med-668	toxicological and mutagenic analysis of artemisia dracunculus (tarragon) extract. - pubmed - ncbi
med-669	christmas gingerbread (lebkuchen) and christmas cheer--review of the potential role of mood elevating amphetamine-like compounds formed in vivo and... - pubmed - ncbi
med-670	cinnamon intake lowers fasting blood glucose: meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-671	vegetarian diet improves insulin resistance and oxidative stress markers more than conventional diet in subjects with type 2 diabetes
med-672	in vitro and in vivo efficacy of sulfo-carrabiose, a sugar-based cosmetic ingredient with anti-cellulite properties. - pubmed - ncbi
med-673	meal modulation of circulating interleukin 18 and adiponectin concentrations in healthy subjects and in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. - pubmed - ncbi
med-674	development of a polyamine database for assessing dietary intake
med-675	dietary polyamine intake and risk of colorectal adenomatous polyps
med-676	dietary lignan intakes in relation to survival among women with breast cancer: the western new york exposures and breast cancer (web) study
med-677	serum enterolactone and prognosis of postmenopausal breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-678	serum enterolactone levels and mortality outcome in women with early breast cancer: a retrospective cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-679	reduction in ki-67 in benign breast tissue of high risk women with the lignan secoisolariciresinol diglycoside (sdg)
med-680	supplementation of flaxseed oil diminishes skin sensitivity and improves skin barrier function and condition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-681	flaxseed supplementation improved insulin resistance in obese glucose intolerant people: a randomized crossover design
med-682	an open-label study on the effect of flax seed powder (linum usitatissimum) supplementation in the management of diabetes mellitus. - pubmed - ncbi
med-683	effect of mammalian lignans on the growth of prostate cancer cell lines. - pubmed - ncbi
med-684	lignans and isoflavonoids in plasma and prostatic fluid in men: samples from portugal, hong kong, and the united kingdom. - pubmed - ncbi
med-685	pilot study to explore effects of low-fat, flaxseed-supplemented diet on proliferation of benign prostatic epithelium and prostate-specific antigen. - pubmed - ncbi
med-686	pilot study of dietary fat restriction and flaxseed supplementation in men with prostate cancer before surgery: exploring the effects on hormonal l... - pubmed - ncbi
med-687	ranking the disease burden of 14 pathogens in food sources in the united states using attribution data from outbreak investigations and expert elic... - pubmed - ncbi
med-688	reversal of fatigue during prolonged exercise by carbohydrate infusion or ingestion. - pubmed - ncbi
med-689	sun-dried raisins are a cost-effective alternative to sports jelly beans in prolonged cycling. - pubmed - ncbi
med-690	egg yolk consumption and carotid plaque. - pubmed - ncbi
med-691	ginger in the prevention of nausea and vomiting: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-692	the effectiveness and safety of ginger for pregnancy-induced nausea and vomiting: a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-693	gamma-irradiation dose: effects on baby-leaf spinach ascorbic acid, carotenoids, folate, alpha-tocopherol, and phylloquinone concentrations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-694	assessment of vitamin and carotenoid concentrations of emerging food products: edible microgreens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-695	arsenic species in poultry feather meal. - pubmed - ncbi
med-696	the influence of dietary lutein and zeaxanthin on visual performance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-697	influence of piperine on the pharmacokinetics of curcumin in animals and human volunteers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-698	addition of açaí (euterpe oleracea) to cigarettes has a protective effect against emphysema in mice. - pubmed - ncbi
med-699	impact of dietary shift to higher-antioxidant foods in copd: a randomised trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-700	nutritional risk factors for the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) in male smokers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-701	oral l-citrulline supplementation improves erection hardness in men with mild erectile dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-702	the efficacy and safety of liraglutide. - pubmed - ncbi
med-703	vegetarian diets and incidence of diabetes in the adventist health study-2
med-704	amla (emblica officinalis gaertn), a wonder berry in the treatment and prevention of cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-705	effects of sour tea (hibiscus sabdariffa) on lipid profile and lipoproteins in patients with type ii diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-706	the aqueous extract of hibiscus sabdariffa calices modulates the production of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-707	uricosuric effect of roselle (hibiscus sabdariffa) in normal and renal-stone former subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-708	inhibitory effect of marinades with hibiscus extract on formation of heterocyclic aromatic amines and sensory quality of fried beef patties. - pubmed - ncbi
med-709	testicular effects of sub-chronic administration of hibiscus sabdariffa calyx aqueous extract in rats. - pubmed - ncbi
med-710	the effect of sour tea (hibiscus sabdariffa) on essential hypertension. - pubmed - ncbi
med-711	effects of hibiscus sabdariffa extract powder and preventive treatment (diet) on the lipid profiles of patients with metabolic syndrome (mesy). - pubmed - ncbi
med-712	chemopreventive properties and molecular mechanisms of the bioactive compounds in hibiscus sabdariffa linne. - pubmed - ncbi
med-713	effects of water extract of hibiscus sabdariffa, linn (malvaceae) 'roselle' on excretion of a diclofenac formulation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-714	towards prevention of vitamin d deficiency and beyond: knowledge gaps and research needs in vitamin d nutrition and public health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-715	evaluation, treatment, and prevention of vitamin d deficiency: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline. - pubmed - ncbi
med-716	vitamin d: a d-lightful solution for health
med-717	fructose intake at current levels in the united states may cause gastrointestinal distress in normal adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-718	the relation of passage of gas an abdominal bloating to colonic gas production. - pubmed - ncbi
med-719	flatulence--causes, relation to diet and remedies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-720	the effect of oral alpha-galactosidase on intestinal gas production and gas-related symptoms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-721	bismuth therapy in gastrointestinal diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-722	an understanding of excessive intestinal gas. - pubmed - ncbi
med-723	effectiveness of devices purported to reduce flatus odor. - pubmed - ncbi
med-724	flatulence--causes, relation to diet and remedies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-725	the incidence of dementia and intake of animal products: preliminary findings from the adventist health study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-726	association of alzheimer disease pathology with abnormal lipid metabolism: the hisayama study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-727	illuminating the 'black box'. a description of 4454 patient visits to 138 family physicians. - pubmed - ncbi
med-728	barriers to providing nutrition counseling cited by physicians: a survey of primary care practitioners. - pubmed - ncbi
med-729	transfer of spinal cord material to subsequent bovine carcasses at splitting. - pubmed - ncbi
med-730	clinical herd health, farm management and antimicrobial resistance in campylobacter coli on finishing pig farms in switzerland. - pubmed - ncbi
med-731	three rare cases of anthrax arising from the same source. - pubmed - ncbi
med-732	dissemination of central nervous system tissue during the slaughter of cattle in three irish abattoirs. - pubmed - ncbi
med-733	amyloid arthropathy in chickens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-734	susceptibility of the domestic duck (anas platyrhynchos) to experimental infection with toxoplasma gondii oocysts. - pubmed - ncbi
med-735	prevalence and incidence of gastroduodenal ulcers during treatment with vascular protective doses of aspirin. - pubmed - ncbi
med-736	diverticular disease: epidemiology and management
med-737	nutrition and lifestyle in relation to bowel movement frequency: a cross-sectional study of 20630 men and women in epic-oxford. - pubmed - ncbi
med-738	phthalates exposure and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in school-age children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-739	association between isolation of staphylococcus aureus one week after calving and milk yield, somatic cell count, clinical mastitis, and culling th... - pubmed - ncbi
med-740	microbial and sensory changes throughout the ripening of prato cheese made from milk with different levels of somatic cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-741	saffron in the treatment of patients with mild to moderate alzheimer's disease: a 16-week, randomized and placebo-controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-742	the incidence of dementia and intake of animal products: preliminary findings from the adventist health study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-743	herbal medicines, other than st. john's wort, in the treatment of depression: a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-744	therapy with saffron and the goddess at thera. - pubmed - ncbi
med-745	the double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial: gold standard or golden calf? - pubmed - ncbi
med-746	evaluation of crocus sativus l. (saffron) on male erectile dysfunction: a pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-747	crocus sativus l. (saffron) in the treatment of premenstrual syndrome: a double-blind, randomised and placebo-controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-748	medical practice and social authority. - pubmed - ncbi
med-749	current perception of nutrition education in u.s. medical schools. - pubmed - ncbi
med-750	risk of gestational diabetes mellitus in relation to maternal egg and cholesterol intake
med-751	dietary fat and cholesterol and risk of cardiovascular disease in older adults: the health abc study
med-752	phytoestrogens and their low dose combinations inhibit mrna expression and activity of aromatase in human granulosa-luteal cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-753	estrogen levels in nipple aspirate fluid and serum during a randomized soy trial
med-754	effect of a dietary portfolio of cholesterol-lowering foods given at 2 levels of intensity of dietary advice on serum lipids in hyperlipidemia: a r... - pubmed - ncbi
med-755	prevalence and public health significance of aluminum residues in milk and some dairy products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-756	diet-related telomere shortening and chromosome stability
med-757	turning back the clock: adopting a healthy lifestyle in middle age. - pubmed - ncbi
med-758	low-risk lifestyle behaviors and all-cause mortality: findings from the national health and nutrition examination survey iii mortality study
med-759	associations of dietary dark-green and deep-yellow vegetables and fruits with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia: modification by smoking. - pubmed - ncbi
med-760	a high antioxidant spice blend attenuates postprandial insulin and triglyceride responses and increases some plasma measures of antioxidant activity in healthy, overweight men
med-761	the counseling practices of internists. - pubmed - ncbi
med-762	the ethiopian field epidemiology and laboratory training program: strengthening public health systems and building human resource capacity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-763	can lifestyle changes reverse coronary heart disease? the lifestyle heart trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-764	galactose-α-1,3-galactose and delayed anaphylaxis, angioedema, and urticaria in children
med-765	anisakis simplex allergy after eating chicken meat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-766	beef, pork, and milk allergy (cross reactivity with each other and pet allergies). - pubmed - ncbi
med-767	analysis of food-allergic and anaphylactic events in the national electronic injury surveillance system. - pubmed - ncbi
med-768	the relevance of tick bites to the production of ige antibodies to the mammalian oligosaccharide galactose-α-1,3-galactose
med-769	fish and shellfish allergy in children: review of a persistent food allergy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-770	evidence-based evaluation and management of chronic urticaria in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-771	anisakis simplex: from obscure infectious worm to inducer of immune hypersensitivity
med-772	anisakiasis, an underestimated infection: effect on intestinal permeability of anisakis simplex-sensitized patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-773	specific stimulation of graves' disease thyrocytes by the natural anti-gal antibody from normal and autologous serum. - pubmed - ncbi
med-774	anaphylaxis to pork kidney is related to ige antibodies specific for galactose-alpha-1,3-galactose. - pubmed - ncbi
med-775	anti-gal: an abundant human natural antibody of multiple pathogeneses and clinical benefits
med-776	a unique natural human igg antibody with anti-alpha-galactosyl specificity
med-777	the relevance of tick bites to the production of ige antibodies to the mammalian oligosaccharide galactose-α-1,3-galactose
med-778	evidence for a human-specific mechanism for diet and antibody-mediated inflammation in carcinoma progression
med-779	an outbreak of neurological autoimmunity with polyradiculoneuropathy in workers exposed to aerosolised porcine neural tissue: a descriptive study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-780	anti-gal titers in healthy adults and inflammatory bowel disease patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-781	stari, or masters disease: lone star tick-vectored lyme-like illness. - pubmed - ncbi
med-782	southern tick-associated rash illness (stari) in the north: stari following a tick bite in long island, new york. - pubmed - ncbi
med-783	a possible role for the alpha 1-->3 galactosyl epitope and the natural anti-gal antibody in oncogenesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-784	naturally developing memory t cell xenoreactivity to swine antigens in human peripheral blood lymphocytes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-785	proteomics, metabolomics, and immunomics on microparticles derived from human atherosclerotic plaques. - pubmed - ncbi
med-786	daily egg consumption in hyperlipidemic adults - effects on endothelial function and cardiovascular risk
med-787	egg consumption and endothelial function: a randomized controlled crossover trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-788	egg yolk consumption and carotid plaque. - pubmed - ncbi
med-789	egg consumption and risk of cardiovascular diseases and diabetes: a meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-790	egg yolk consumption and carotid plaque. - pubmed - ncbi
med-791	usefulness of brachial artery flow-mediated dilation to predict long-term cardiovascular events in subjects without heart disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-792	frequency of nut consumption and mortality risk in the predimed nutrition intervention trial
med-793	effects of diets high in walnuts and flax oil on hemodynamic responses to stress and vascular endothelial function
med-794	effects of walnuts on endothelial function in overweight adults with visceral obesity: a randomized, controlled, crossover trial
med-795	nuts, hypertension and endothelial function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-796	a systematic review of the effects of nuts on blood lipid profiles in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-797	us prevalence of self-reported peanut, tree nut, and sesame allergy: 11-year follow-up. - pubmed - ncbi
med-798	hazelnut-enriched diet improves cardiovascular risk biomarkers beyond a lipid-lowering effect in hypercholesterolemic subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-799	concentration of mercury in hair of diseased people in japan. - pubmed - ncbi
med-800	methylmercury exposure and incident diabetes in u.s. men and women in two prospective cohorts
med-801	a strong dose-response relation between serum concentrations of persistent organic pollutants and diabetes: results from the national health and ex... - pubmed - ncbi
med-802	simultaneous exposure of non-diabetics to high levels of dioxins and mercury increases their risk of insulin resistance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-803	persistent organic pollutants and type 2 diabetes: a prospective analysis in the nurses’ health study and meta-analysis
med-804	perfluorinated compounds, polychlorinated biphenyls, and organochlorine pesticide contamination in composite food samples from dallas, texas, usa
med-805	the role of persistent organic pollutants in the worldwide epidemic of type 2 diabetes mellitus and the possible connection to farmed atlantic salm... - pubmed - ncbi
med-806	public health concern behind the exposure to persistent organic pollutants and the risk of metabolic diseases
med-807	molecular epidemiologic evidence for diabetogenic effects of dioxin exposure in u.s. air force veterans of the vietnam war
med-808	a strong dose-response relation between serum concentrations of persistent organic pollutants and diabetes: results from the national health and ex... - pubmed - ncbi
med-809	organochlorine exposure and incidence of diabetes in a cohort of great lakes sport fish consumers
med-810	increased rate of hospitalization for diabetes and residential proximity of hazardous waste sites
med-811	short- and long-term morbidity and mortality in the population exposed to dioxin after the "seveso accident". - pubmed - ncbi
med-812	environmental contaminants as risk factors for developing diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-813	fish consumption, insulin sensitivity and beta-cell function in the insulin resistance atherosclerosis study (iras)
med-814	omega-3 fatty acids and incident type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
med-815	public health concern behind the exposure to persistent organic pollutants and the risk of metabolic diseases
med-816	the effect of obesity on polycystic ovary syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-817	comparison of sex hormonal and metabolic profiles between omnivores and vegetarians in pre- and post-menopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-818	role of maca (lepidium meyenii) consumption on serum interleukin-6 levels and health status in populations living in the peruvian central andes over 4000 m of altitude
med-819	effect of metformin compared with hypocaloric diet on serum c-reactive protein level and insulin resistance in obese and overweight women with poly... - pubmed - ncbi
med-820	the effect of marjoram (origanum majorana) tea on the hormonal profile of women with polycystic ovary syndrome: a randomised controlled pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-821	low glycemic index vegan or low-calorie weight loss diets for women with polycystic ovary syndrome: a randomized controlled feasibility study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-822	clinical and biochemical characterization of women with polycystic ovary syndrome in north rhine-westphalia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-823	dietary composition in the treatment of polycystic ovary syndrome: a systematic review to inform evidence-based guidelines. - pubmed - ncbi
med-824	dietary intervention versus metformin to improve the reproductive outcome in women with polycystic ovary syndrome. a prospective comparative study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-825	effects of increased dietary protein-to-carbohydrate ratios in women with polycystic ovary syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-826	the polycystic ovary syndrome: a position statement from the european society of endocrinology. - pubmed - ncbi
med-827	dietary habits in adolescent girls with polycystic ovarian syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-828	maca (l. meyenii) for improving sexual function: a systematic review
med-829	body fat composition and distribution in women with polycystic ovary syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-830	extraction, purification and antioxidant activities of the polysaccharides from maca (lepidium meyenii). - pubmed - ncbi
med-831	dhea, dheas and pcos. - pubmed - ncbi
med-832	structured exercise training programme versus hypocaloric hyperproteic diet in obese polycystic ovary syndrome patients with anovulatory infertilit... - pubmed - ncbi
med-833	clinical, metabolic, and endocrine parameters in response to metformin and lifestyle intervention in women with polycystic ovary syndrome: a random... - pubmed - ncbi
med-834	effect of lifestyle intervention on the reproductive endocrine profile in women with polycystic ovarian syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis
med-835	reducing bioavailable sex hormones through a comprehensive change in diet: the diet and androgens (diana) randomized trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-836	the optimal diet for women with polycystic ovary syndrome? - pubmed - ncbi
med-837	a randomized trial of the effects of two types of short-term hypocaloric diets on weight loss in women with polycystic ovary syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-838	docosahexaenoic acid from a cultured microalga inhibits cell growth and induces apoptosis by upregulating bax/bcl-2 ratio in human breast carcinoma... - pubmed - ncbi
med-839	omega-3 fatty acids for nutrition and medicine: considering microalgae oil as a vegetarian source of epa and dha. - pubmed - ncbi
med-840	efficacy of home washing methods in controlling surface microbial contamination on fresh produce. - pubmed - ncbi
med-841	effect of dietary soy intake on breast cancer risk according to menopause and hormone receptor status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-842	high accumulation and subcellular distribution of thallium in green cabbage (brassica oleracea l. var. capitata l.). - pubmed - ncbi
med-843	treatment of vulvovaginal candidiasis with boric acid powder. - pubmed - ncbi
med-844	antifungal agents vs. boric acid for treating chronic mycotic vulvovaginitis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-845	boric acid inhibits embryonic histone deacetylases: a suggested mechanism to explain boric acid-related teratogenicity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-846	antifungal mechanisms supporting boric acid therapy of candida vaginitis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-847	large prospective investigation of meat intake, related mutagens, and risk of renal cell carcinoma
med-848	dietary intake of nitrate and nitrite and risk of renal cell carcinoma in the nih-aarp diet and health study
med-849	intake of fiber and fiber-rich plant foods is associated with a lower risk of renal cell carcinoma in a large us cohort
med-850	folate intake, mthfr polymorphisms, and risk of esophageal, gastric, and pancreatic cancer: a meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-851	chemoprevention in barrett's oesophagus. - pubmed - ncbi
med-852	fiber intake and the risk of oral, pharyngeal and esophageal cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-853	hydrogen peroxide 3% exposures. - pubmed - ncbi
med-854	cerebral air gas embolism from concentrated hydrogen peroxide ingestion. - pubmed - ncbi
med-855	hydrogen peroxide poisoning. - pubmed - ncbi
med-856	effects of acute consumption of a fruit and vegetable purée-based drink on vasodilation and oxidative status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-857	prospective studies of dietary alpha-linolenic acid intake and prostate cancer risk: a meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-858	effect of mammalian lignans on the growth of prostate cancer cell lines. - pubmed - ncbi
med-859	gamma-irradiation dose: effects on baby-leaf spinach ascorbic acid, carotenoids, folate, alpha-tocopherol, and phylloquinone concentrations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-860	assessment of vitamin and carotenoid concentrations of emerging food products: edible microgreens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-861	associations of whole-blood fatty acids and dietary intakes with prostate cancer in jamaica. - pubmed - ncbi
med-862	traditionally living populations in east africa have a mean serum 25-hydroxyvitamin d concentration of 115 nmol/l. - pubmed - ncbi
med-863	penetrating ocular injury by durian fruit. - pubmed - ncbi
med-864	fatal fulminant hepatitis associated with ganoderma lucidum (lingzhi) mushroom powder. - pubmed - ncbi
med-865	bitter melon extract impairs prostate cancer cell cycle progression and delays prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia in tramp model
med-866	bitter melon (momordica charantia): a review of efficacy and safety. - pubmed - ncbi
med-867	the effect of momordica charantia capsule preparation on glycemic control in type 2 diabetes mellitus needs further studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-868	bitter melon (momordica charantia) extract suppresses adrenocortical cancer cell proliferation through modulation of the apoptotic pathway, steroid... - pubmed - ncbi
med-869	yerba mate (ilex paraguariensis) consumption is associated with higher bone mineral density in postmenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-870	recent advances on ilex paraguariensis research: minireview. - pubmed - ncbi
med-871	an evaluation of mercury concentrations in three brands of canned tuna. - pubmed - ncbi
med-872	mercury exposure and risks from dental amalgam in the us population, post-2000. - pubmed - ncbi
med-873	apoptosis and cell cycle arrest of human colorectal cancer cell line ht-29 induced by vanillin. - pubmed - ncbi
med-874	vanillin enhances trail-induced apoptosis in cancer cells through inhibition of nf-kappab activation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-875	inhibition of bacterial quorum sensing by vanilla extract. - pubmed - ncbi
med-876	adherence to mediterranean diet and intake of antioxidants influence spontaneous conversion of atrial fibrillation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-877	detrimental effects of energy drink consumption on platelet and endothelial function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-878	acute effects of coffee on endothelial function in healthy subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-879	impact of acute caffeine ingestion on endothelial function in subjects with and without coronary artery disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-880	effects of acute administration of caffeine on vascular function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-881	dose-dependent effects of decaffeinated coffee on endothelial function in healthy subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-882	the acute effect of green tea consumption on endothelial function in healthy individuals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-883	short- and long-term black tea consumption reverses endothelial dysfunction in patients with coronary artery disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-884	effect of different cooking methods on vegetable oxalate content. - pubmed - ncbi
med-885	bioavailability of oxalic acid from spinach, sugar beet fibre and a solution of sodium oxalate consumed by female volunteers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-886	effects of hempseed and flaxseed oils on the profile of serum lipids, serum total and lipoprotein lipid concentrations and haemostatic factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-887	storage elevates phenolic content and antioxidant activity but suppresses antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic properties of colored-flesh potatoes ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-888	anti-obesity and antioxidative effects of purple sweet potato extract in 3t3-l1 adipocytes in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-889	high-antioxidant potatoes: acute in vivo antioxidant source and hypotensive agent in humans after supplementation to hypertensive subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-890	diet and cancer of the colon and rectum: a case-control study in china. - pubmed - ncbi
med-891	bisphenol a in canned food products from canadian markets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-892	habitual dietary sodium intake is inversely associated with coronary flow reserve in middle-aged male twins
med-893	influence of piperine on the pharmacokinetics of curcumin in animals and human volunteers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-894	ceylon cinnamon does not affect postprandial plasma glucose or insulin in subjects with impaired glucose tolerance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-895	asthma induced by sulphur dioxide, benzoate and tartrazine contained in orange drinks. - pubmed - ncbi
med-896	sulfite sensitivity: significance in human health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-897	inhibition of non-haem iron absorption in man by polyphenolic-containing beverages. - pubmed - ncbi
med-898	impact of tea drinking on iron status in the uk: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-899	milk-induced pulmonary disease in infants (heiner syndrome). - pubmed - ncbi
med-900	cow's milk allergy in thai children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-901	cow's milk allergy is associated with recurrent otitis media during childhood. - pubmed - ncbi
med-902	the toxicity of extracts of plant parts of moringa stenopetala in hepg2 cells in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-903	antiproliferation and induction of apoptosis by moringa oleifera leaf extract on human cancer cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-904	a systematic review and meta-analysis of the effects of pasteurization on milk vitamins, and evidence for raw milk consumption and other health-rel... - pubmed - ncbi
med-905	inhibition of angiotensin convertin enzyme (ace) activity by the anthocyanins delphinidin- and cyanidin-3-o-sambubiosides from hibiscus sabdariffa. - pubmed - ncbi
med-906	anaphylaxis to annatto dye: a case report. - pubmed - ncbi
med-907	risk factors for ischaemic and intracerebral haemorrhagic stroke in 22 countries (the interstroke study): a case-control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-908	treatment of hypovitaminosis d in infants and toddlers
med-909	a study on degradation kinetics of ascorbic acid in amla (phyllanthus emblica l.) during cooking. - pubmed - ncbi
med-910	effect of cooking on garlic (allium sativum l.) antiplatelet activity and thiosulfinates content. - pubmed - ncbi
med-911	swimming with death: naegleria fowleri infections in recreational waters. - pubmed - ncbi
med-912	report: prunes and liver function: a clinical trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-913	a literature review on the safety assessment of genetically modified plants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-914	studies of the safety of chinese wild rice. - pubmed - ncbi
med-915	heavy metals in wild rice from northern wisconsin. - pubmed - ncbi
med-916	differences in antioxidant levels of fresh, frozen and freeze-dried strawberries and strawberry jam. - pubmed - ncbi
med-917	effect of freezing and storage on the phenolics, ellagitannins, flavonoids, and antioxidant capacity of red raspberries. - pubmed - ncbi
med-918	combination of erythritol and fructose increases gastrointestinal symptoms in healthy adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-919	evaluation, treatment, and prevention of vitamin d deficiency: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline. - pubmed - ncbi
med-920	vitamin d in the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-921	old wine in new bottles: vitamin d in the treatment and prevention of tuberculosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-922	the effect of vegetarian diet on selected essential nutrients in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-923	dexamethasone facilitates lipid accumulation in chicken skeletal muscle. - pubmed - ncbi
med-924	severe metabolic alkalosis due to baking soda ingestion: case reports of two patients with unsuspected antacid overdose. - pubmed - ncbi
med-925	baking soda: a potentially fatal home remedy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-926	severe metabolic alkalosis in the emergency department. - pubmed - ncbi
med-927	evaluation of the effects of neptune krill oil on the clinical course of hyperlipidemia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-928	incorporation of epa and dha into plasma phospholipids in response to different omega-3 fatty acid formulations - a comparative bioavailability study of fish oil vs. krill oil
med-929	algal-oil capsules and cooked salmon: nutritionally equivalent sources of docosahexaenoic acid. - pubmed - ncbi
med-930	organochlorine pesticide air-water exchange and bioconcentration in krill in the ross sea. - pubmed - ncbi
med-931	aqueous uptake and sublethal toxicity of p,p'-dde in non-feeding larval stages of antarctic krill (euphausia superba). - pubmed - ncbi
med-932	non-typhoidal salmonellosis: emerging problems. - pubmed - ncbi
med-933	recurrent monoarthritis in an 11-year-old boy with occult coeliac disease. successful and stable remission after gluten-free diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-934	prevalence of urinary stone disease in vegetarians. - pubmed - ncbi
med-935	lifestyle recommendations to reduce the risk of kidney stones. - pubmed - ncbi
med-936	effect of vitamin c supplements on urinary oxalate and ph in calcium stone-forming patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-937	a prospective double-blind randomized placebo-controlled study of the effect of saffron (crocus sativus linn.) on semen parameters and seminal plas... - pubmed - ncbi
med-938	study of cytotoxic and apoptogenic properties of saffron extract in human cancer cell lines. - pubmed - ncbi
med-939	satiereal, a crocus sativus l extract, reduces snacking and increases satiety in a randomized placebo-controlled study of mildly overweight, health... - pubmed - ncbi
med-940	an open label, randomized, fixed-dose, crossover study comparing efficacy and safety of sildenafil citrate and saffron (crocus sativus linn.) for t... - pubmed - ncbi
med-941	topical vitamin a treatment of recalcitrant common warts. - pubmed - ncbi
med-942	esophageal injury by apple cider vinegar tablets and subsequent evaluation of products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-943	embryotoxic effects of pine needles and pine needle extracts. - pubmed - ncbi
med-944	nanomaterials in consumer products: a challenging analytical problem. - pubmed - ncbi
med-945	review of the efficacy of green tea, isoflavones and aloe vera supplements based on randomised controlled trials. - pubmed - ncbi
med-946	bulking agents, antispasmodics and antidepressants for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-947	aloe versus silver sulfadiazine creams for second-degree burns: a randomized controlled study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-948	microbiological examination of vegetable seed sprouts in korea. - pubmed - ncbi
med-949	efficacy of an herbal dietary supplement (smooth move) in the management of constipation in nursing home residents: a randomized, double-blind, pla... - pubmed - ncbi
med-950	multivitamin supplement use and risk of breast cancer: a meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-951	the effect of supplemental vitamins and minerals on the development of prostate cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-952	cannabis and the lung. - pubmed - ncbi
med-953	effects of acute consumption of a fruit and vegetable purée-based drink on vasodilation and oxidative status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-954	associations between maternal phthalate exposure and cord sex hormones in human infants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-955	comparative assessment of human exposure to phthalate esters from house dust in china and the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-956	emerging pollutants in wastewater: a review of the literature. - pubmed - ncbi
med-957	final report on the safety assessment of capsicum annuum extract, capsicum annuum fruit extract, capsicum annuum resin, capsicum annuum fruit powde... - pubmed - ncbi
med-958	a comparative review of thermography as a breast cancer screening technique. - pubmed - ncbi
med-959	neurologic abnormalities in cobalamin deficiency are associated with higher cobalamin "analogue" values than are hematologic abnormalities. - pubmed - ncbi
med-960	diagnostic performance of serum cobalamin tests: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-961	vitamin d(3) is more potent than vitamin d(2) in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-962	treatment of hypovitaminosis d in infants and toddlers
med-963	comparison of fatty acid, cholesterol, and vitamin a and e composition in eggs from hens housed in conventional cage and range production facilities. - pubmed - ncbi
med-964	curcumin ingestion and exercise training improve vascular endothelial function in postmenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-965	endothelial dysfunction: the early predictor of atherosclerosis
med-966	effects of different types of exercise training followed by detraining on endothelium-dependent dilation in patients with recent myocardial infarct... - pubmed - ncbi
med-967	dietary intake of fruits and vegetables improves microvascular function in hypertensive subjects in a dose-dependent manner. - pubmed - ncbi
med-968	effect of endurance exercise training and curcumin intake on central arterial hemodynamics in postmenopausal women: pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-969	spatial and temporal dynamics of the endothelium. - pubmed - ncbi
med-970	diet and risk of diverticular disease in oxford cohort of european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition (epic): prospective study of british vegetarians and non-vegetarians
med-971	constipation and a low-fiber diet are not associated with diverticulosis
med-972	symptomless diverticular disease and intake of dietary fibre. - pubmed - ncbi
med-973	what is a high fiber diet? - pubmed - ncbi
med-974	complicated diverticulitis
med-975	diverticular disease of the colon. the first of the western diseases shown to be due to a deficiency of dietary fibre. - pubmed - ncbi
med-976	prevalence of diverticular disease, hiatus hernia, and pelvic phleboliths in black and white americans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-977	constipation and a low-fiber diet are not associated with diverticulosis
med-978	a delayed recrudescent case of sigmoidocutaneous fistula due to diverticulitis
med-979	giant and multiple jejunal diverticula presenting as peritonitis a significant challenging disorder
med-980	homocysteine-lowering by b vitamins slows the rate of accelerated brain atrophy in mild cognitive impairment: a randomized controlled trial
med-981	plasma total homocysteine status of vegetarians compared with omnivores: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-982	mechanisms of homocysteine neurotoxicity in neurodegenerative diseases with special reference to dementia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-983	forecasting the global burden of alzheimer's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-984	plasma concentrations of homocysteine and other aminothiol compounds are related to food intake in healthy human subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-985	is hyperhomocysteinemia an alzheimer’s disease (ad) risk factor, an ad marker or neither?
med-986	effect of homocysteine lowering treatment on cognitive function: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. - pubmed - ncbi
med-987	plasma homocysteine as a risk factor for dementia and alzheimer's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-988	hypothesis: hyperhomocysteinemia is an indicator of oxidant stress. - pubmed - ncbi
med-989	americans do not meet federal dietary recommendations
med-990	associations between elevated homocysteine, cognitive impairment, and reduced white matter volume in healthy old adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-991	prevalence of cognitive impairment without dementia in the united states
med-992	vegan diet-based lifestyle program rapidly lowers homocysteine levels. - pubmed - ncbi
med-993	association between dietary fiber intake and the folate status of a group of female adolescents. - pubmed - ncbi
med-994	preventing alzheimer’s disease-related gray matter atrophy by b-vitamin treatment
med-995	human exposure to pbdes: associations of pbde body burdens with food consumption and house dust concentrations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-996	concentrations and speciation of polybrominated diphenyl ethers in human amniotic fluid
med-997	intake of dioxins and related compounds from food in the u.s. population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-998	polybrominated diphenyl ethers (pbdes) in breast milk and neuropsychological development in infants
med-999	polybrominated diphenyl ethers in food and human dietary exposure: a review of the recent scientific literature. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1000	neurobehavioral function and low-level exposure to brominated flame retardants in adolescents: a cross-sectional study
med-1001	polybrominated diphenyl ethers in u.s. meat and poultry from two statistically designed surveys showing trends and levels from 2002 to 2008. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1002	polybrominated diphenyl ethers (pbdes), hydroxylated pbdes (oh-pbdes), and measures of thyroid function in second trimester pregnant women in california
med-1003	in utero and childhood polybrominated diphenyl ether (pbde) exposures and neurodevelopment in the chamacos study
med-1004	diet contributes significantly to the body burden of pbdes in the general u.s. population
med-1005	effect of fibre, antispasmodics, and peppermint oil in the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome: systematic review and meta-analysis
med-1006	treatment of abdominal pain in irritable bowel syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1007	irritable bowel syndrome in the united states: prevalence, symptom patterns and impact. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1008	peppermint oil (mintoil) in the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome: a prospective double blind placebo-controlled randomized trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1009	the effect of enteric-coated, delayed-release peppermint oil on irritable bowel syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1010	treatment-emergent sexual dysfunction related to antidepressants: a meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1011	placebos without deception: a randomized controlled trial in irritable bowel syndrome
med-1012	peppermint oil for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1013	quality of life in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1014	medication management of irritable bowel syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1015	a treatment trial of acupuncture in ibs patients
med-1016	linaclotide (linzess) for irritable bowel syndrome with constipation and for chronic idiopathic constipation
med-1017	complementary and alternative medicines in irritable bowel syndrome: an integrative view
med-1018	the effect of intensive diabetes treatment on the progression of diabetic retinopathy in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. the diabetes control ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1019	diabetic retinopathy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1020	pan retinal photocoagulation for proliferative diabetic retinopathy: pattern scan laser versus argon laser. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1021	management of diabetic retinopathy: a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1022	an archaeologic dig: a rice-fruit diet reverses ecg changes in hypertension. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1023	optimal management of cytomegalovirus retinitis in patients with aids
med-1024	bowel function measurements of individuals with different eating patterns.
med-1025	how to interpret a functional or motility test - defecography
med-1026	pressure changes in varicose veins. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1027	varicose veins, deep vein thrombosis, and haemorrhoids: epidemiology and suggested aetiology
med-1028	faecal retention: a common cause in functional bowel disorders, appendicitis and haemorrhoids--with medical and surgical therapy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1029	comparison of straining during defecation in three positions: results and implications for human health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1030	transient changes in cerebral vascular resistance during the valsalva maneuver in man. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1031	primary constipation: an underlying mechanism. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1032	defecation syncope. a symptom with multiple etiologies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1033	"bowel obsession syndrome" in a patient with chronic constipation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1034	insights into normal and disordered bowel habits from bowel diaries
med-1035	how trustworthy are bowel histories? comparison of recalled and recorded information.
med-1036	the response of the colon to eating. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1037	a brief journey into medical care and disease in ancient egypt.
med-1038	dietary fiber and personality factors as determinants of stool output. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1039	bowel obsession syndrome in a patient with ulcerative colitis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1040	assessment of normal bowel habits in the general adult population: the popcol study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1041	gastroenterology in ancient egypt. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1042	colonic motility in man: features in normal subjects and in patients with chronic idiopathic constipation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1043	effect of a very-high-fiber vegetable, fruit, and nut diet on serum lipids and colonic function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1044	bowel function measurements of individuals with different eating patterns.
med-1045	colon cancer and diet, with special reference to intakes of fat and fiber. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1046	cephalic phase of colonic pressure response to food.
med-1047	the development of the concept of dietary fiber in human nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1048	defecation frequency and timing, and stool form in the general population: a prospective study.
med-1049	bowel movement: the sixth vital sign. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1050	the effect of personal lifestyle intervention among health care providers on their patients and clinics; the promoting health by self experience (p... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1051	how does physician advice influence patient behavior? evidence for a priming effect. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1052	can noncommunicable diseases be prevented? lessons from studies of populations and individuals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1053	physician disclosure of healthy personal behaviors improves credibility and ability to motivate. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1054	a global view on the development of non communicable diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1055	why the bush administration and the global sugar industry are determined to demolish the 2004 who global strategy on diet, physical activity and he... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1056	now and then: the global nutrition transition: the pandemic of obesity in developing countries
med-1057	the perils of ignoring history: big tobacco played dirty and millions died. how similar is big food?
med-1058	political context of the world health organization: sugar industry threatens to scupper the who. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1059	lipotoxicity: effects of dietary saturated and transfatty acids
med-1060	death protein 5 and p53-upregulated modulator of apoptosis mediate the endoplasmic reticulum stress–mitochondrial dialog triggering lipotoxic rodent and human β-cell apoptosis
med-1061	saturated fat intake and insulin resistance in men with coronary artery disease. the stanford coronary risk intervention project investigators and ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1062	fatty acids and glucolipotoxicity in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1063	plasma fatty acid composition and incidence of diabetes in middle-aged adults: the atherosclerosis risk in communities (aric) study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1064	pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes: tracing the reverse route from cure to cause. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1065	banting memorial lecture 2012 reversing the twin cycles of type 2 diabetes
med-1066	dietary habits and their relations to insulin resistance and postprandial lipemia in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1067	differential effect of oleic and palmitic acid on lipid accumulation and apoptosis in cultured hepatocytes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1068	molecular mechanisms and the role of saturated fatty acids in the progression of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
med-1069	differential effects of monounsaturated, polyunsaturated and saturated fat ingestion on glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, sensitivity and clear... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1070	the long lifespan and low turnover of human islet beta cells estimated by mathematical modelling of lipofuscin accumulation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1071	saturated free fatty acid sodium palmitate-induced lipoapoptosis by targeting glycogen synthase kinase-3β activation in human liver cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1072	relationship of dietary saturated fatty acids and body habitus to serum insulin concentrations: the normative aging study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1073	characterization of bacteria, clostridia and bacteroides in faeces of vegetarians using qpcr and pcr-dgge fingerprinting. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1074	endocrine-disrupting chemicals and obesity development in humans: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1075	effects of a high-fat meal on pulmonary function in healthy subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1076	vegetarian diets and blood pressure among white subjects: results from the adventist health study-2 (ahs-2)
med-1077	red meat and colon cancer: should we become vegetarians, or can we make meat safer? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1078	the association between dietary patterns and mental health in early adolescence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1079	vegetarian diets and incidence of diabetes in the adventist health study-2
med-1080	rapid reduction of serum cholesterol and blood pressure by a twelve-day, very low fat, strictly vegetarian diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1081	effect of a single high-fat meal on endothelial function in healthy subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1082	influencing public nutrition for non-communicable disease prevention: from community intervention to national programme--experiences from finland. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1083	quantification of butyryl coa:acetate coa-transferase genes reveals different butyrate production capacity in individuals according to diet and age. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1084	vegetarian diet affects genes of oxidative metabolism and collagen synthesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1085	protein-source tryptophan as an efficacious treatment for social anxiety disorder: a pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1086	does a vegan diet reduce risk for parkinson's disease? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1087	dietary patterns and depressive symptoms among japanese men and women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1088	intensive lifestyle changes may affect the progression of prostate cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1089	original articles: vegetarian compared with meat dietary protein source and phosphorus homeostasis in chronic kidney disease
med-1090	is escherichia coli urinary tract infection a zoonosis? proof of direct link with production animals and meat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1091	renal function parameters of thai vegans compared with non-vegans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1092	effects of a low-fat, high-fiber diet and exercise program on breast cancer risk factors in vivo and tumor cell growth and apoptosis in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1093	vegetarian diets are associated with healthy mood states: a cross-sectional study in seventh day adventist adults
med-1094	a comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990–2010: a systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2010
med-1095	global and regional mortality from 235 causes of death for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: a systematic analysis for the global burden of disease s... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1096	an archaeologic dig: a rice-fruit diet reverses ecg changes in hypertension. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1097	moses maimonides: medieval physician and scholar. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1098	intake of dioxins and related compounds from food in the u.s. population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1099	evidence of effects of environmental chemicals on the endocrine system in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1100	lower serum testosterone associated with elevated polychlorinated biphenyl concentrations in native american men
med-1101	exposure of human fetal penile cells to different pcb mixtures: transcriptome analysis points to diverse modes of interference on external genitali... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1102	male reproductive organs are at risk from environmental hazards
med-1103	dietary acrylamide intake and the risk of lymphatic malignancies: the netherlands cohort study on diet and cancer
med-1104	multiple myeloma : recent progress in diagnosis and treatment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1105	a case of multiple myeloma presenting as a bullous dermatosis
med-1106	cancer in british vegetarians: updated analyses of 4998 incident cancers in a cohort of 32,491 meat eaters, 8612 fish eaters, 18,298 vegetarians, and 2246 vegans
med-1107	from myeloma precursor disease to multiple myeloma: new diagnostic concepts and opportunities for early intervention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1108	consumption of artificial sweetener– and sugar-containing soda and risk of lymphoma and leukemia in men and women
med-1109	risk factors for multiple myeloma: a hospital-based case-control study in northwest china. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1110	the potential role of curcumin in patients with monoclonal gammopathy of undefined significance--its effect on paraproteinemia and the urinary n-te... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1111	clinical trials and observations: monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (mgus) consistently precedes multiple myeloma: a prospective study
med-1112	curcumin (diferuloylmethane) down-regulates the constitutive activation of nuclear factor-kappa b and ikappabalpha kinase in human multiple myeloma... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1113	monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance, smoldering multiple myeloma, and curcumin: a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled cross-... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1114	occupational exposure to meat and risk of lymphoma: a multicenter case-control study from europe. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1115	disparities in the prevalence, pathogenesis and progression of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance and multiple myeloma between blacks and whites
med-1116	molecular mimicry between hla-dr alleles associated with rheumatoid arthritis and proteus mirabilis as the aetiological basis for autoimmunity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1117	rheumatoid arthritis treated with vegetarian diets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1118	decrease in anti-proteus mirabilis but not anti-escherichia coli antibody levels in rheumatoid arthritis patients treated with fasting and a one year vegetarian diet.
med-1119	determination of urinary lignans and phytoestrogen metabolites, potential antiestrogens and anticarcinogens, in urine of women on various habitual ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1120	molecular mimicry in the autoimmune pathogenesis of rheumatic heart disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1121	rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease triggered by proteus urinary tract infection
med-1122	evidence that patients with rheumatoid arthritis have asymptomatic 'non-significant' proteus mirabilis bacteriuria more frequently than healthy con... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1123	systematic literature review on economic implications and pharmacoeconomic issues of rheumatoid arthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1124	an uncooked vegan diet shifts the profile of human fecal microflora: computerized analysis of direct stool sample gas-liquid chromatography profiles of bacterial cellular fatty acids.
med-1125	rheumatoid arthritis is caused by a proteus urinary tract infection. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1126	an update on bioactive plant lignans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1127	rheumatoid arthritis is caused by proteus: the molecular mimicry theory and karl popper. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1128	rheumatoid arthritis is linked to proteus--the evidence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1129	rheumatic fever: from sore throat to autoimmune heart lesions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1130	changes of faecal flora in rheumatoid arthritis during fasting and one-year vegetarian diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1131	faecal microbial flora and disease activity in rheumatoid arthritis during a vegan diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1132	uncooked, lactobacilli-rich, vegan food and rheumatoid arthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1133	prevalence of kidney stones in the united states
med-1134	effects of low animal protein or high-fiber diets on urine composition in calcium nephrolithiasis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1135	should recurrent calcium oxalate stone formers become vegetarians? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1136	the effect of high animal protein intake on the risk of calcium stone-formation in the urinary tract. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1137	diet and risk of kidney stones in the oxford cohort of the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition (epic). - pubmed - ncbi
med-1138	animal protein and the risk of kidney stones: a comparative metabolic study of animal protein sources. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1139	environmental exposure to pesticides and cancer risk in multiple human organ systems. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1140	organic food: buying more safety or just peace of mind? a critical review of the literature. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1141	pesticides and human chronic diseases: evidences, mechanisms, and perspectives. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1142	formation of dioxins during exposure of pesticide formulations to sunlight. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1143	risk perceptions and food choice: an exploratory analysis of organic- versus conventional-produce buyers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1144	perceived risks of conventional and organic produce: pesticides, pathogens, and natural toxins. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1145	higher antioxidant and lower cadmium concentrations and lower incidence of pesticide residues in organically grown crops: a systematic literature review and meta-analyses
med-1146	estimation of cancer risks and benefits associated with a potential increased consumption of fruits and vegetables. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1147	cadmium in organic and conventional pig production. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1148	association between organic dietary choice during pregnancy and hypospadias in offspring: a study of mothers of 306 boys operated on for hypospadias. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1149	profiles of organic food consumers in a large sample of french adults: results from the nutrinet-santé cohort study
med-1150	organically grown food provides health benefits to drosophila melanogaster
med-1151	organic food consumption and the incidence of cancer in a large prospective study of women in the united kingdom
med-1152	pesticide exposure and serum organochlorine residuals among testicular cancer patients and healthy controls. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1153	attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and urinary metabolites of organophosphate pesticides in u.s. children 8–15 years
med-1154	organic foods: health and environmental advantages and disadvantages. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1155	higher antioxidant and lower cadmium concentrations and lower incidence of pesticide residues in organically grown crops: a systematic literature review and meta-analyses
med-1156	a prospective study of organochlorines in adipose tissue and risk of non-hodgkin lymphoma
med-1157	reduction of pesticide residues on produce by rinsing. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1158	behaviour of some organophosphorus and organochlorine pesticides in potatoes during soaking in different solutions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1159	cancer and non-cancer health effects from food contaminant exposures for children and adults in california: a risk assessment
med-1160	effectiveness of dishwashing liquids in removing chlorothalonil and chlorpyrifos residues from cherry tomatoes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1161	effect of handling and processing on pesticide residues in food- a review
med-1162	pesticide residues in imported, organic, and "suspect" fruits and vegetables. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1163	higher antioxidant and lower cadmium concentrations and lower incidence of pesticide residues in organically grown crops: a systematic literature review and meta-analyses
med-1164	organophosphorus pesticide exposure of urban and suburban preschool children with organic and conventional diets.
med-1165	concentrations of polybrominated diphenyl ethers, hexachlorobenzene and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in various foodstuffs before and after coo... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1166	prenatal exposure to organophosphate pesticides and iq in 7-year-old children
med-1167	pesticides and human chronic diseases: evidences, mechanisms, and perspectives. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1168	are organic foods safer or healthier than conventional alternatives?: a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1169	reduction in urinary organophosphate pesticide metabolites in adults after a week-long organic diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1170	parental occupational exposure to pesticides as risk factor for brain tumors in children and young adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1171	chemical exposure early in life and the neurodevelopment of children--an overview of current epidemiological evidence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1172	dietary intake and its contribution to longitudinal organophosphorus pesticide exposure in urban/suburban children
med-1173	choice of organic foods is related to perceived consequences for human health and to environmentally friendly behaviour. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1174	organic diets significantly lower children’s dietary exposure to organophosphorus pesticides
med-1175	a systematic review and meta-analysis of childhood leukemia and parental occupational pesticide exposure
med-1176	neurodevelopmental effects in children associated with exposure to organophosphate pesticides: a systematic review
med-1177	residential exposure to pesticides and childhood leukaemia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1178	are organic foods safer or healthier than conventional alternatives?: a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1179	organic foods: health and environmental advantages and disadvantages. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1180	antioxidant levels and inhibition of cancer cell proliferation in vitro by extracts from organically and conventionally cultivated strawberries. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1181	higher antioxidant and lower cadmium concentrations and lower incidence of pesticide residues in organically grown crops: a systematic literature review and meta-analyses
med-1182	fruit and soil quality of organic and conventional strawberry agroecosystems
med-1183	relevance of protein fermentation to gut health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1184	antagonistic effects of sulfide and butyrate on proliferation of colonic mucosa: a potential role for these agents in the pathogenesis of ulcerativ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1185	sulfite sensitivity: significance in human health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1186	resistant starch lowers fecal concentrations of ammonia and phenols in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1187	influence of dietary factors on the clinical course of ulcerative colitis: a prospective cohort study
med-1188	inflammatory bowel disease in rural sub-saharan africa: rarity of diagnosis in patients attending mission hospitals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1189	a prospective study of long-term intake of dietary fiber and risk of crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis
med-1190	high high-density-lipoprotein cholesterol in african children and adults in a population free of coronary heart diseae.
med-1191	a comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990–2010: a systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2010
med-1192	use of blood pressure lowering drugs in the prevention of cardiovascular disease: meta-analysis of 147 randomised trials in the context of expectations from prospective epidemiological studies
med-1193	the effects of lowering ldl cholesterol with statin therapy in people at low risk of vascular disease: meta-analysis of individual data from 27 randomised trials
med-1194	can noncommunicable diseases be prevented? lessons from studies of populations and individuals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1195	antioxidant status and its association with elevated depressive symptoms among us adults: national health and nutrition examination surveys 2005–06
med-1196	dietary pattern and depressive symptoms in middle age
med-1197	fruit, vegetable and antioxidant intakes are lower in older adults with depression
med-1198	high-dose ascorbic acid increases intercourse frequency and improves mood: a randomized controlled clinical trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1199	a tomato-rich diet is related to depressive symptoms among an elderly population aged 70 years and over: a population-based, cross-sectional analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1200	antioxidants as potential therapeutics for neuropsychiatric disorders
med-1201	dietary folate and the risk of depression in finnish middle-aged men. a prospective follow-up study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1202	is low folate a risk factor for depression? a meta‐analysis and exploration of heterogeneity
med-1203	folic acid supplementation for prevention of mood disorders in young people at familial risk: a randomised, double blind, placebo controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1204	cholesterol crystals cause mechanical damage to biological membranes: a proposed mechanism of plaque rupture and erosion leading to arterial thromb... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1205	effect of cholesterol crystals on plaques and intima in arteries of patients with acute coronary and cerebrovascular syndromes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1206	a way to reverse cad? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1207	cholesterol crystals piercing the arterial plaque and intima trigger local and systemic inflammation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1208	death row nutrition. curious conclusions of last meals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1209	adherence to healthy lifestyle habits in us adults, 1988-2006. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1210	comparing indices of diet quality with chronic disease mortality risk in postmenopausal women in the women's health initiative observational study:... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1211	temporal and regional trends in the prevalence of healthy lifestyle characteristics: united states, 1994–2007
med-1212	healthy lifestyle characteristics among adults in the united states, 2000. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1213	cardiovascular health behavior and health factor changes (1988 –2008) and projections to 2020
med-1214	the state of us health, 1990-2010: burden of diseases, injuries, and risk factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1215	clostridium difficile colitis in the united states: a decade of trends, outcomes, risk factors for colectomy, and mortality after colectomy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1216	clostridium difficile infection in the community: a zoonotic disease? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1217	clostridium difficile: its potential as a source of foodborne disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1218	longitudinal study of clostridium difficile and methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus associated with pigs from weaning through to the end of... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1219	diverse sources of c. difficile infection identified on whole-genome sequencing
med-1220	clostridium difficile infection in humans and piglets: a 'one health' opportunity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1221	clostridium difficile in foods and animals: history and measures to reduce exposure. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1222	varied prevalence of clostridium difficile in an integrated swine operation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1223	cow milk consumption, insulin-like growth factor-i, and human biology: a life history approach. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1224	skim milk, whey, and casein increase body weight and whey and casein increase the plasma c-peptide concentration in overweight adolescents. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1225	leucine signaling in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes and obesity
med-1226	milk intake and total dairy consumption: associations with early menarche in nhanes 1999-2004
med-1227	do breast-feeding and delayed introduction of solid foods protect against subsequent obesity? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1228	excessive leucine-mtorc1-signalling of cow milk-based infant formula: the missing link to understand early childhood obesity
med-1229	milk is not just food but most likely a genetic transfection system activating mtorc1 signaling for postnatal growth
med-1230	relationship between funding sources and outcomes of obesity-related research. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1231	lower lifetime dietary fiber intake is associated with carotid artery stiffness: the amsterdam growth and health longitudinal study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1232	high dietary fiber intake prevents stroke at a population level. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1233	dietary fiber intake and risk of first stroke: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1234	cardiovascular benefits of dietary fiber. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1235	a twenty-first century cancer epidemic caused by obesity: the involvement of insulin, diabetes, and insulin-like growth factors
med-1236	pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes: tracing the reverse route from cure to cause. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1237	banting memorial lecture 2012 reversing the twin cycles of type 2 diabetes
med-1238	relationship of dietary fat to glucose metabolism. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1239	free fatty acids and skeletal muscle insulin resistance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1240	update on the management of postoperative nausea and vomiting. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1241	controlled breathing with or without peppermint aromatherapy for postoperative nausea and/or vomiting symptom relief: a randomized controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1242	a simplified risk score for predicting postoperative nausea and vomiting: conclusions from cross-validations between two centers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1243	comparison of inhalation of isopropyl alcohol vs promethazine in the treatment of postoperative nausea and vomiting (ponv) in patients identified a... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1244	examination of the effectiveness of peppermint aromatherapy on nausea in women post c-section. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1245	update on the management of postoperative nausea and vomiting and postdischarge nausea and vomiting in ambulatory surgery. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1246	aromatherapy with peppermint, isopropyl alcohol, or placebo is equally effective in relieving postoperative nausea. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1247	antiemetic activity of volatile oil from mentha spicata and mentha × piperita in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
med-1248	patients' attitudes to rectal drug administration. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1249	hypocholesterolemic effect of substituting soybean protein for animal protein in the diet of healthy young women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1250	a comparison of the effect of diets containing beef protein and plant proteins on blood lipids of healthy young men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1251	effects of plant-based diets on plasma lipids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1252	determinants of hypocholesterolemic response to soy and animal protein-based diets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1253	effects of soy as tofu vs meat on lipoprotein concentrations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1254	effect of meat replacement by tofu on chd risk factors including copper induced ldl oxidation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1255	modern organic and broiler chickens sold for human consumption provide more energy from fat than protein. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1256	a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials that compare the lipid effects of beef versus poultry and/or fish consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1257	protein and coronary heart disease: the role of different protein sources. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1258	the effect of combining plant sterols, soy protein, viscous fibers, and almonds in treating hypercholesterolemia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1259	consumption of blueberries with a high-carbohydrate, low-fat breakfast decreases postprandial serum markers of oxidation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1260	effect of a very-high-fiber vegetable, fruit, and nut diet on serum lipids and colonic function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1261	‘catalytic’ doses of fructose may benefit glycaemic control without harming cardiometabolic risk factors: a small meta-analysis of randomised controlled feeding trials
med-1262	effect of fruit restriction on glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes – a randomized trial
med-1263	fructose: it’s “alcohol without the buzz”
med-1264	berries reduce postprandial insulin responses to wheat and rye breads in healthy women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1265	synergistic toxicity of the environmental neurotoxins methylmercury and β-n-methylamino-l-alanine. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1266	the cyanobacteria derived toxin beta-n-methylamino-l-alanine and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
med-1267	from the cover: transfer of a cyanobacterial neurotoxin within a temperate aquatic ecosystem suggests pathways for human exposure
med-1268	linking β-methylamino-l-alanine exposure to sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in annapolis, md. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1269	does α-amino-β-methylaminopropionic acid (bmaa) play a role in neurodegeneration?
med-1270	beyond guam: the cyanobacteria/bmaa hypothesis of the cause of als and other neurodegenerative diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1271	dietary bmaa exposure in an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis cluster from southern france
med-1272	a cluster of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in new hampshire: a possible role for toxic cyanobacteria blooms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1273	amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. a case-control study following detection of a cluster in a small wisconsin community. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1274	cyanobacterial neurotoxin β-n-methylamino-l-alanine (bmaa) in shark fins
med-1275	cyanobacterial blooms and the occurrence of the neurotoxin beta-n-methylamino-l-alanine (bmaa) in south florida aquatic food webs
med-1276	spatial clustering of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in finland at place of birth and place of death. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1277	is exposure to cyanobacteria an environmental risk factor for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and other neurodegenerative diseases? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1278	does α-amino-β-methylaminopropionic acid (bmaa) play a role in neurodegeneration?
med-1279	spatial clustering of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and the potential role of bmaa. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1280	diverse taxa of cyanobacteria produce β-n-methylamino-l-alanine, a neurotoxic amino acid
med-1281	scanning the human proteome for calmodulin-binding proteins
med-1282	beyond guam: the cyanobacteria/bmaa hypothesis of the cause of als and other neurodegenerative diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1283	current pathways for epidemiological research in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1284	2-amino-3-(methylamino)-propanoic acid (bmaa) in cycad flour: an unlikely cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia of guam. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1285	cycad neurotoxins, consumption of flying foxes, and als-pdc disease in guam. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1286	cyanobacterial neurotoxin bmaa in als and alzheimer's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1287	cyanobacterial blooms and the occurrence of the neurotoxin beta-n-methylamino-l-alanine (bmaa) in south florida aquatic food webs
med-1288	biomagnification of cycad neurotoxins in flying foxes: implications for als-pdc in guam. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1289	a mechanism for slow release of biomagnified cyanobacterial neurotoxins and neurodegenerative disease in guam
med-1290	possible therapy for als based on the cyanobacteria/bmaa hypothesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1291	mushrooms, tumors, and immunity: an update. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1292	the immunobiology of mushrooms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1293	immunity: plants as effective mediators. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1294	immune-modulatory effects of dietary yeast beta-1,3/1,6-d-glucan
med-1295	natural and modified (1-->3)-beta-d-glucans in health promotion and disease alleviation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1296	natural immunomodulators and their stimulation of immune reaction: true or false? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1297	effect of beta 1, 3/1, 6 glucan on upper respiratory tract infection symptoms and mood state in marathon athletes
med-1298	increased interleukin-10 but unchanged insulin sensitivity after 4 weeks of (1, 3)(1, 6)-beta-glycan consumption in overweight humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1299	baker's yeast beta-glucan supplement reduces upper respiratory symptoms and improves mood state in stressed women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1300	yeast (1,3)-(1,6)-beta-glucan helps to maintain the body’s defence against pathogens: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, multicentric study in healthy subjects
med-1301	the impact of cereal grain consumption on the development and severity of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1302	increasing whole grain intake as part of prevention and treatment of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
med-1303	avena sativa (oat), a potential neutraceutical and therapeutic agent: an overview. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1304	nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: an emerging threat to obese and diabetic individuals
med-1305	whole grain intake in relation to body weight: from epidemiological evidence to clinical trials. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1306	effect of treatment with a colloidal oatmeal lotion on the acneform eruption induced by epidermal growth factor receptor and multiple tyrosine-kina... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1307	bedside ultrasound in the diagnosis of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
med-1308	the role of whole grains in body weight regulation
med-1309	oat prevents obesity and abdominal fat distribution, and improves liver function in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1310	greater whole-grain intake is associated with lower risk of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and weight gain. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1311	cetuximab preclinical antitumor activity (monotherapy and combination based) is not predicted by relative total or activated epidermal growth facto... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1312	inhibitory effect of oatmeal extract oligomer on vasoactive intestinal peptide-induced inflammation in surviving human skin. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1313	effect of treatment with a colloidal oatmeal lotion on the acneform eruption induced by epidermal growth factor receptor and multiple tyrosine-kina... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1314	the management of skin reactions in cancer patients receiving epidermal growth factor receptor targeted therapies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1315	primary and acquired resistance of colorectal cancer cells to anti-egfr antibodies converge on mek/erk pathway activation and can be overcome by co... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1316	colloidal oatmeal: history, chemistry and clinical properties. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1317	avenanthramides inhibit proliferation of human colon cancer cell lines in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1318	rice consumption is not associated with risk of cardiovascular disease morbidity or mortality in japanese men and women: a large population-based, ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1319	diet and chronic degenerative diseases: perspectives from china. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1320	white rice, brown rice, and risk of type 2 diabetes in us men and women
med-1321	phospholipids in rice: significance in grain quality and health benefits: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1322	whole grain and refined grain consumption and the risk of type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of cohort studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1323	low-carbohydrate diet scores and risk of type 2 diabetes in men
med-1324	differential effect of protein and fat ingestion on blood glucose responses to high- and low-glycemic-index carbohydrates in noninsulin-dependent d... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1325	effect of protein ingestion on the glucose and insulin response to a standardized oral glucose load. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1326	prevalence of diabetes among men and women in china. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1327	greater whole-grain intake is associated with lower risk of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and weight gain. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1328	global, regional, and national prevalence of overweight and obesity in children and adults during 1980-2013: a systematic analysis for the global b... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1329	white rice-based food consumption and ischemic stroke risk: a case-control study in southern china. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1330	diabetes prevalence and determinants in adults in china mainland from 2000 to 2010: a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1331	dynamics of the nutrition transition toward the animal foods sector in china and its implications: a worried perspective. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1332	incidence of type 2 diabetes in japan: a systematic review and meta-analysis
med-1333	insulin secretion as a determinant of pancreatic cancer risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1334	program and policy options for preventing obesity in china
med-1335	glycaemic responses to glucose and rice in people of chinese and european ethnicity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1336	fruit consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes: results from three prospective longitudinal cohort studies
med-1337	milk intake and risk of hip fracture in men and women: a meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1338	milk intake and risk of mortality and fractures in women and men: cohort studies
med-1339	calcium supplementation and bone mineral density in females from childhood to young adulthood: a randomized controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1340	milk consumption during teenage years and risk of hip fractures in older adults
med-1341	skeletal health in adult patients with classic galactosemia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1342	the efficacy of paroxetine and placebo in treating anxiety and depression: a meta-analysis of change on the hamilton rating scales
med-1343	selective publication of antidepressant trials and its influence on apparent efficacy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1344	deception as treatment: the case of depression. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1345	challenging received wisdom: antidepressants and the placebo effect
med-1346	exercise for the treatment of depression and anxiety. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1347	antidepressants and the placebo response. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1348	initial severity and antidepressant benefits: a meta-analysis of data submitted to the food and drug administration
med-1349	antidepressants and the placebo effect
med-1350	a pill for the ill? patients’ reports of their experience of the medical encounter in the treatment of depression
med-1351	conflicts of interest in psychiatry: strategies to cultivate literacy in daily practice. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1352	primum non nocere: an evolutionary analysis of whether antidepressants do more harm than good
med-1353	the drugs don’t work? antidepressants and the current and future pharmacological management of depression
med-1354	antidepressant drug effects and depression severity: a patient-level meta-analysis
med-1355	exercise for the treatment of depression and anxiety. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1356	association between physical activity and mental disorders among adults in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1357	effects of exercise training on older patients with major depression. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1358	the acute effects of exercise on mood state. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1359	physical exercise intervention in depressive disorders: meta-analysis and systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1360	exercise and pharmacotherapy in the treatment of major depressive disorder
med-1361	a provegetarian food pattern and reduction in total mortality in the prevención con dieta mediterránea (predimed) study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1362	adherence to mediterranean diet and risk of cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1363	"towards an even healthier mediterranean diet". - pubmed - ncbi
med-1364	mediterranean diet and non enzymatic antioxidant capacity in the predimed study: evidence for a mechanism of antioxidant tuning. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1365	changes in bread consumption and 4-year changes in adiposity in spanish subjects at high cardiovascular risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1366	mediterranean diet and public health: personal reflections. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1367	does a glass of red wine improve endothelial function? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1368	definitions and potential health benefits of the mediterranean diet: views from experts around the world
med-1369	anatomy of health effects of mediterranean diet: greek epic prospective cohort study
med-1370	reductions in cardiovascular disease projected from modest reductions in dietary salt
med-1371	adherence to the mediterranean diet and risk of breast cancer in the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1372	the postprandial effect of components of the mediterranean diet on endothelial function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1373	the role of virgin olive oil components in the modulation of endothelial function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1374	definitions and potential health benefits of the mediterranean diet: views from experts around the world
med-1375	a provegetarian food pattern and reduction in total mortality in the prevención con dieta mediterránea (predimed) study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1376	sociodemographic and lifestyle statistics of oldest old people (>80 years) living in ikaria island: the ikaria study
med-1377	higher diet quality is associated with decreased risk of all-cause, cardiovascular disease, and cancer mortality among older adults
med-1378	longevity and diet. myth or pragmatism? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1379	ten years of life: is it a matter of choice? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1380	anatomy of health effects of mediterranean diet: greek epic prospective cohort study
med-1381	nut consumption, vegetarian diets, ischemic heart disease risk, and all-cause mortality: evidence from epidemiologic studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1382	frequency of nut consumption and mortality risk in the predimed nutrition intervention trial
med-1383	mediterranean diet and non enzymatic antioxidant capacity in the predimed study: evidence for a mechanism of antioxidant tuning. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1384	changes in ultrasound-assessed carotid intima-media thickness and plaque with a mediterranean diet: a substudy of the predimed trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1385	effect of pistachio diet on lipid parameters, endothelial function, inflammation, and oxidative status: a prospective study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1386	communicating clinical research to reduce cancer risk through diet: walnuts as a case example
med-1387	nut consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and all-cause mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1388	nut consumption and 5-y all-cause mortality in a mediterranean cohort: the sun project. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1389	the mediterranean diet improves the systemic lipid and dna oxidative damage in metabolic syndrome individuals. a randomized, controlled, trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1390	olive oil intake and risk of cardiovascular disease and mortality in the predimed study
med-1391	primary prevention of cardiovascular disease with a mediterranean diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1392	mediterranean diet, traditional risk factors, and the rate of cardiovascular complications after myocardial infarction: final report of the lyon di... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1393	changes in ultrasound-assessed carotid intima-media thickness and plaque with a mediterranean diet: a substudy of the predimed trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1394	primary prevention of cardiovascular disease with a mediterranean diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1395	mediterranean alpha-linolenic acid-rich diet in secondary prevention of coronary heart disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1396	a way to reverse cad? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1397	omega-3 fatty acids and antioxidants in edible wild plants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1398	mediterranean diet and cardiovascular disease: historical perspective and latest evidence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1399	mediterranean diet, traditional risk factors, and the rate of cardiovascular complications after myocardial infarction: final report of the lyon di... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1400	accruing evidence on benefits of adherence to the mediterranean diet on health: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1401	dietary iron intake and body iron stores are associated with risk of coronary heart disease in a meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies
med-1402	mediterranean diet and health status: an updated meta-analysis and a proposal for a literature-based adherence score. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1403	heme iron intake and risk of new-onset diabetes in a mediterranean population at high risk of cardiovascular disease: an observational cohort analysis
med-1404	the effect of mediterranean diet on the development of type 2 diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis of 10 prospective studies and 136,846 participants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1405	polyphenol intake and mortality risk: a re-analysis of the predimed trial
med-1406	dietary magnesium intake is inversely associated with mortality in adults at high cardiovascular disease risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1407	the mediterranean diet: a history of health
med-1408	mediterranean diet, stroke, cognitive impairment, and depression: a meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1409	changing prevalence of coronary heart disease risk factors and cardiovascular diseases in men of a rural area of crete from 1960 to 1991. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1410	the diet and 15-year death rate in the seven countries study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1411	the effect of mediterranean diet on metabolic syndrome and its components: a meta-analysis of 50 studies and 534,906 individuals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1412	faecal ph value and its modification by dietary means in south african black and white schoolchildren. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1413	human gut microbiota: does diet matter? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1414	high colonic ph promotes colorectal cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1415	a vegan or vegetarian diet substantially alters the human colonic faecal microbiota. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1416	faecal urobilinogen levels and ph of stools in population groups with different incidence of cancer of the colon, and their possible role in its aetiology.
med-1417	diet, microbiota, and microbial metabolites in colon cancer risk in rural africans and african americans
med-1418	hydrogen sulfide induces direct radical-associated dna damage. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1419	a diet high in fat and meat but low in dietary fibre increases the genotoxic potential of 'faecal water'. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1420	nutrition and colonic health: the critical role of the microbiota. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1421	contribution of dietary protein to sulfide production in the large intestine: an in vitro and a controlled feeding study in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1422	diet and risk of inflammatory bowel disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1423	animal protein intake and risk of inflammatory bowel disease: the e3n prospective study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1424	when can we cure crohn's? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1425	epidemiologic analysis of crohn disease in japan: increased dietary intake of n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids and animal protein relates to the inc... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1426	influence of dietary protein supplements on the formation of bacterial metabolites in the colon.
med-1427	thematic review series: the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis: an interpretive history of the cholesterol controversy, part iii: mechanistically defi... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1428	optimal low-density lipoprotein is 50 to 70 mg/dl: lower is better and physiologically normal. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1429	thematic review series: the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. an interpretive history of the cholesterol controversy, part v: the discovery of the s... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1430	vegetarian diet and cholesterol and triglycerides levels. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1431	advanced glycation end product level, diabetes, and accelerated cognitive aging
med-1432	do sirtuins promote mammalian longevity?: a critical review on its relevance to the longevity effect induced by calorie restriction
med-1433	dietary advanced glycation end products and aging
med-1434	protective effects and mechanisms of sirtuins in the nervous system
med-1435	longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging studies of older adults: a shrinking brain. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1436	sirtuins in cognitive ageing and alzheimer's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1437	at the crossroad of lifespan, calorie restriction, chromatin and disease: meeting on sirtuins. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1438	serum concentration of an inflammatory glycotoxin, methylglyoxal, is associated with increased cognitive decline in elderly individuals
med-1439	brain volume changes on longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging in normal older people. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1440	sirt1 decrease parallels the accumulation of tau in alzheimer disease
med-1441	the science of salsa: antimicrobial properties of salsa components to learn scientific methodology
med-1442	genetic analysis of chemosensory traits in human twins
med-1443	anti-inflammatory potential of a lipolotion containing coriander oil in the ultraviolet erythema test. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1444	coriander (coriandrum sativum l.): a potential source of high-value components for functional foods and nutraceuticals--a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1445	the effects of a low-fat, plant-based dietary intervention on body weight, metabolism, and insulin sensitivity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1446	longitudinal association between animal and vegetable protein intake and obesity among adult males in the united states: the chicago western electric study
med-1447	nutrient intake in the geico multicenter trial: the effects of a multicomponent worksite intervention
med-1448	the costs of obesity in the workplace. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1449	workplace wellness programs can generate savings. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1450	a multicenter randomized controlled trial of a plant-based nutrition program to reduce body weight and cardiovascular risk in the corporate setting: the geico study
med-1451	the link between workforce health and safety and the health of the bottom line: tracking market performance of companies that nurture a "culture of... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1452	role of insulin in the pathogenesis of free fatty acid-induced insulin resistance in skeletal muscle. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1453	vegetarian diet affects genes of oxidative metabolism and collagen synthesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1454	substituting dietary saturated for monounsaturated fat impairs insulin sensitivity in healthy men and women: the kanwu study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1455	lipotoxicity: effects of dietary saturated and transfatty acids
med-1456	veganism and its relationship with insulin resistance and intramyocellular lipid. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1457	a high-fat diet coordinately downregulates genes required for mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation in skeletal muscle. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1458	higher insulin sensitivity in vegans is not associated with higher mitochondrial density. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1459	integrating mechanisms for insulin resistance: common threads and missing links
med-1460	mechanisms underlying skeletal muscle insulin resistance induced by fatty acids: importance of the mitochondrial function
med-1461	intramyocellular triglyceride content is a determinant of in vivo insulin resistance in humans: a 1h-13c nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy as... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1462	free fatty acids and skeletal muscle insulin resistance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1463	role of insulin in the pathogenesis of free fatty acid-induced insulin resistance in skeletal muscle. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1464	fasting plasma free fatty acids and risk of type 2 diabetes: the atherosclerosis risk in communities study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1465	effects of intravenous and dietary lipid challenge on intramyocellular lipid content and the relation with insulin sensitivity in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1466	how free fatty acids inhibit glucose utilization in human skeletal muscle. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1467	adiposity and insulin resistance in humans: the role of the different tissue and cellular lipid depots. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1468	dynamics of fat cell turnover in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1469	free fatty acids and skeletal muscle insulin resistance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1470	intramyocellular lipid concentrations are correlated with insulin sensitivity in humans: a 1h nmr spectroscopy study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1471	overnight lowering of free fatty acids with acipimox improves insulin resistance and glucose tolerance in obese diabetic and nondiabetic subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1472	rapid impairment of skeletal muscle glucose transport/phosphorylation by free fatty acids in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1473	mechanism of free fatty acid-induced insulin resistance in humans.
med-1474	free fatty acids and skeletal muscle insulin resistance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1475	effects of an overnight intravenous lipid infusion on intramyocellular lipid content and insulin sensitivity in african-american versus caucasian adolescents
med-1476	neanderthal cannibalism at moula-guercy, ardèche, france. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1477	the garden of eden--plant based diets, the genetic drive to conserve cholesterol and its implications for heart disease in the 21st century. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1478	paleolithic nutrition: twenty-five years later. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1479	beyond the paleolithic prescription: incorporating diversity and flexibility in the study of human diet evolution
med-1480	patients' expectations of screening and preventive treatments
med-1481	five years after to err is human: what have we learned? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1482	does hand hygiene compliance among health care workers change when patients are in contact precaution rooms in icus? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1483	empirical evaluation of very large treatment effects of medical interventions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1484	estimating health care-associated infections and deaths in u.s. hospitals, 2002
med-1485	are preventive drugs preventive enough? a study of patients' expectation of benefit from preventive drugs. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1486	patient expectations on lipid-lowering drugs. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1487	patients' expectations of screening and preventive treatments
med-1488	what benefit do patients expect from adding second and third antihypertensive drugs?
med-1489	a way to reverse cad? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1490	are preventive drugs preventive enough? a study of patients' expectation of benefit from preventive drugs. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1491	flaxseed fed pork: n-3 fatty acid enrichment and contribution to dietary recommendations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1492	the effects of blood pressure reduction and of different blood pressure-lowering regimens on major cardiovascular events according to baseline bloo... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1493	flaxseed - a miraculous defense against some critical maladies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1494	potent antihypertensive action of dietary flaxseed in hypertensive patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1495	response surface methodology for predicting quality characteristics of beef patties added with flaxseed and tomato paste. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1496	brain rust: recent discoveries on the role of oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1497	traumatic brain injury: a risk factor for alzheimer's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1498	a modest proposal for a longitudinal study of dementia prevention (with apologies to jonathan swift, 1729). - pubmed - ncbi
med-1499	neuroprotective effect of natural products against alzheimer's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1500	fruit, vegetables and prevention of cognitive decline or dementia: a systematic review of cohort studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1501	systematic review: factors associated with risk for and possible prevention of cognitive decline in later life. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1502	the longer-term impacts of western diet on human cognition and the brain. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1503	a possible role for lutein and zeaxanthin in cognitive function in the elderly. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1504	risk factors and preventive interventions for alzheimer disease: state of the science. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1505	nutritional modulation of cognitive function and mental health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1506	western diet consumption and cognitive impairment: links to hippocampal dysfunction and obesity
med-1507	curcumin ingestion and exercise training improve vascular endothelial function in postmenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1508	leisure time spent sitting in relation to total mortality in a prospective cohort of us adults
med-1509	sedentary time in adults and the association with diabetes, cardiovascular disease and death: systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1510	hemodynamic responses during prolonged sitting. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1511	sedentary time and cardio-metabolic biomarkers in us adults: nhanes 2003–06
med-1512	effect of endurance exercise training and curcumin intake on central arterial hemodynamics in postmenopausal women: pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1513	too much sitting: the population-health science of sedentary behavior
med-1514	breaks in sedentary time: beneficial associations with metabolic risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1515	postprandial lipaemia: effects of sitting, standing and walking in healthy normolipidaemic humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1516	sitting and endothelial dysfunction: the role of shear stress
med-1517	breaking prolonged sitting reduces postprandial glycemia in healthy, normal-weight adults: a randomized crossover trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1518	treadmill desks: a 1-year prospective trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1519	improved performance on clerical tasks associated with administration of peppermint odor. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1520	the effects of peppermint on exercise performance
med-1521	effects of peppermint teas on plasma testosterone, follicle-stimulating hormone, and luteinizing hormone levels and testicular tissue in rats. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1522	spearmint herbal tea has significant anti-androgen effects in polycystic ovarian syndrome. a randomized controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1523	a near fatal case of high dose peppermint oil ingestion- lessons learnt
med-1524	can ambient scent enhance the nightlife experience?
med-1525	effect of spearmint (mentha spicata labiatae) teas on androgen levels in women with hirsutism. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1526	the effect of inhaling peppermint odor and ethanol in women athletes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1527	vegetarian dietary patterns and mortality in adventist health study 2
med-1528	effect of the vegetarian diet on non-communicable diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1529	risk of hospitalization or death from ischemic heart disease among british vegetarians and nonvegetarians: results from the epic-oxford cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1530	cardiovascular disease mortality and cancer incidence in vegetarians: a meta-analysis and systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1531	a multicountry ecological study of cancer incidence rates in 2008 with respect to various risk-modifying factors
med-1532	trends in mortality from cancers of the breast, colon, prostate, esophagus, and stomach in east asia: role of nutrition transition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1533	an after-school snack of raisins lowers cumulative food intake in young children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1534	glucose and insulin responses to manufactured and whole-food snacks. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1535	raisins compared with other snack effects on glycemia and blood pressure: a randomized, controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1536	dried fruit consumption is associated with improved diet quality and reduced obesity in us adults: national health and nutrition examination survey... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1537	raisins and additional walking have distinct effects on plasma lipids and inflammatory cytokines
med-1538	a premeal snack of raisins decreases mealtime food intake more than grapes in young children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1539	vegetarian diets and incidence of diabetes in the adventist health study-2
med-1540	vegetarian diets: what do we know of their effects on common chronic diseases?
med-1541	does a vegetarian diet reduce the occurrence of diabetes?
med-1542	status of cardiovascular health in us adults: prevalence estimates from the national health and nutrition examination surveys (nhanes) 2003-2008
med-1543	patient-related diet and exercise counseling: do providers' own lifestyle habits matter? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1544	selection of levels of prevention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1545	physician smoking status, attitudes toward smoking, and cessation advice to patients: an international survey. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1546	low prevalence of “ideal cardiovascular health” in a community-based population: the heart strategies concentrating on risk evaluation (heart score) study
med-1547	cross-analysis of dietary prescriptions and adherence in 356 hypercholesterolaemic patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1548	defining and setting national goals for cardiovascular health promotion and disease reduction: the american heart association's strategic impact go... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1549	physicians' health habits are associated with lifestyle counseling for hypertensive patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1550	effect of potentially modifiable risk factors associated with myocardial infarction in 52 countries (the interheart study): case-control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1551	effect of ingestion of meat on plasma cholesterol of vegetarians. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1552	dietary lipids and blood cholesterol: quantitative meta-analysis of metabolic ward studies.
med-1553	developing actionable dietary guidance messages: dietary fat as a case study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1554	reduced or modified dietary fat for preventing cardiovascular disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1555	diet and serum cholesterol: do zero correlations negate the relationship? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1556	meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies evaluating the association of saturated fat with cardiovascular disease
med-1557	intake of fatty acids in general populations worldwide does not meet dietary recommendations to prevent coronary heart disease: a systematic review... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1558	recommended dietary reference intakes, nutritional goals and dietary guidelines for fat and fatty acids: a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1559	adherence to the wcrf/aicr guidelines for cancer prevention is associated with lower mortality among older female cancer survivors
med-1560	ideal cardiovascular health is inversely associated with incident cancer: the atherosclerosis risk in communities study
med-1561	vegetarian diets and the incidence of cancer in a low-risk population
med-1562	macronutrient intake and risk of urothelial cell carcinoma in the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1563	the combined effects of healthy lifestyle behaviors on all cause mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1564	adherence to wcrf/aicr cancer prevention recommendations and risk of post-menopausal breast cancer
med-1565	adherence to the world cancer research fund/american institute for cancer research guidelines and risk of death in europe: results from the europea... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1566	is concordance with world cancer research fund/american institute for cancer research guidelines for cancer prevention related to subsequent risk o... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1567	cancer incidence among danish seventh-day adventists and baptists. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1568	trp channel blamed for burning cold after a tropical fish meal
med-1569	polymyositis after ciguatera toxin exposure. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1570	ciguatera: recent advances but the risk remains. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1571	ciguatera in réunion island (sw indian ocean): epidemiology and clinical patterns. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1572	ciguatera fish poisoning. a southern california epidemic.
med-1573	ciguatera and scombroid fish poisoning in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1574	crohn's disease-associated adherent-invasive escherichia coli adhesion is enhanced by exposure to the ubiquitous dietary polysaccharide maltodextrin
med-1575	changes in expression and distribution of claudin 2, 5 and 8 lead to discontinuous tight junctions and barrier dysfunction in active crohn's disease
med-1576	dietary intake and risk of developing inflammatory bowel disease: a systematic review of the literature. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1577	treatment-related progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy: current understanding and future steps
med-1578	dietary clues to the pathogenesis of crohn's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1579	crohn's disease: a review of treatment options and current research. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1580	translocation of crohn's disease escherichia coli across m-cells: contrasting effects of soluble plant fibres and emulsifiers
med-1581	when can we cure crohn's? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1582	a prospective study of long-term intake of dietary fiber and risk of crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis
med-1583	the sensitivity of the child to sex steroids: possible impact of exogenous estrogens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1584	obstetric complications of twin pregnancies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1585	effects of twin gestation on maternal morbidity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1586	evidence-based care of women with a multiple pregnancy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1587	mechanisms of twinning: vii. effect of diet and heredity on the human twinning rate. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1588	reducing the incidence of twins and triplets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1589	development of an lc-ms/ms method to quantify sex hormones in bovine milk and influence of pregnancy in their levels. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1590	are oral contraceptives a significant contributor to the estrogenicity of drinking water? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1591	the sensitivity of the child to sex steroids: possible impact of exogenous estrogens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1592	occurrence of estrogen hormones in biosolids, animal manure and mushroom compost. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1593	oestrogen levels in serum and urine of premenopausal women eating low and high amounts of meat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1594	occurrence, fate, and biodegradation of estrogens in sewage and manure. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1595	development of an lc-ms/ms method to quantify sex hormones in bovine milk and influence of pregnancy in their levels. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1596	are oral contraceptives a significant contributor to the estrogenicity of drinking water? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1597	an assessment of potential exposure and risk from estrogens in drinking water
med-1598	cigarette smoke toxins deposited on surfaces: implications for human health
med-1599	exposure to nitrosamines in thirdhand tobacco smoke increases cancer risk in non-smokers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1600	beyond celery and starter culture: advances in natural/organic curing processes in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1601	survey of naturally and conventionally cured commercial frankfurters, ham, and bacon for physio-chemical characteristics that affect bacterial growth. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1602	dietary intake of nitrate and nitrite and risk of renal cell carcinoma in the nih-aarp diet and health study
med-1603	thirdhand cigarette smoke in an experimental chamber: evidence of surface deposition of nicotine, nitrosamines and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1604	cruciferous vegetables consumption and risk of renal cell carcinoma: a meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1605	it is time to regulate carcinogenic tobacco-specific nitrosamines in cigarette tobacco
med-1606	intake of fiber and fiber-rich plant foods is associated with a lower risk of renal cell carcinoma in a large us cohort
med-1607	long-term dietary sodium, potassium and fluid intake; exploring potential novel risk factors for renal cell cancer in the netherlands cohort study on diet and cancer
med-1608	determination of total n-nitroso compounds and their precursors in frankfurters, fresh meat, dried salted fish, sauces, tobacco, and tobacco smoke ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1609	high-carbohydrate, high-fiber diets increase peripheral insulin sensitivity in healthy young and old adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1610	pork, beef and chicken have similar effects on acute satiety and hormonal markers of appetite. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1611	latest insights into the risk of cancer in diabetes
med-1612	effect of protein ingestion on the glucose and insulin response to a standardized oral glucose load. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1613	taiwanese vegetarians have higher insulin sensitivity than omnivores. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1614	insulin sensitivity in chinese ovo-lactovegetarians compared with omnivores. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1615	role of diet and exercise in the management of hyperinsulinemia and associated atherosclerotic risk factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1616	very-low-carbohydrate ketogenic diet v. low-fat diet for long-term weight loss: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1617	effect of a 21 day daniel fast on metabolic and cardiovascular disease risk factors in men and women
med-1618	a moderate increase in daily protein intake causing an enhanced endogenous insulin secretion does not alter circulating levels or urinary excretion... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1619	no evidence of insulin resistance in normal weight vegetarians. a case control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1620	a 21-day daniel fast with or without krill oil supplementation improves anthropometric parameters and the cardiometabolic profile in men and women
med-1621	coffee, tea, and mortality. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1622	coffee, caffeine, and risk of completed suicide: results from 3 prospective cohorts of american adults
med-1623	possible neurologic effects of aspartame, a widely used food additive.
med-1624	direct and indirect cellular effects of aspartame on the brain. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1625	sugar substitutes: health controversy over perceived benefits
med-1626	adverse reactions to aspartame: double-blind challenge in patients from a vulnerable population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1627	sweetened beverages, coffee, and tea and depression risk among older us adults
med-1628	heavy coffee drinking and the risk of suicide. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1629	the potential toxicity of artificial sweeteners. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1630	neurobehavioral effects of aspartame consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1631	coffee, caffeine, and risk of depression among women
med-1632	meat consumption and prospective weight change in participants of the epic-panacea study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1633	longitudinal changes in bmi in older adults are associated with meat consumption differentially, by type of meat consumed. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1634	cardiovascular disease data to be standardized across europe. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1635	tea consumption enhances endothelial-dependent vasodilation; a meta-analysis
med-1636	coffee consumption and serum lipids: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled clinical trials. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1637	black tea increases coronary flow velocity reserve in healthy male subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1638	caffeine enhances endothelial repair by an ampk-dependent mechanism. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1639	impact of acute caffeine ingestion on endothelial function in subjects with and without coronary artery disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1640	effect of coffee on endothelial function in healthy subjects: the role of caffeine. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1641	caffeine impairs myocardial blood flow response to physical exercise in patients with coronary artery disease as well as in age-matched controls
med-1642	dose-dependent effects of decaffeinated coffee on endothelial function in healthy subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1643	does a glass of red wine improve endothelial function? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1644	association of coffee drinking with total and cause-specific mortality
med-1645	the acute effect of green tea consumption on endothelial function in healthy individuals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1646	a new proposed guidance system for beverage consumption in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1647	short- and long-term black tea consumption reverses endothelial dysfunction in patients with coronary artery disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1648	coffee and endothelial function: a battle between caffeine and antioxidants? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1649	consumption of a boiled greek type of coffee is associated with improved endothelial function: the ikaria study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1650	tobacco and obesity epidemics: not so different after all?
med-1651	body weight status and cardiovascular risk factors in adults by frequency of candy consumption
med-1652	profits and pandemics: prevention of harmful effects of tobacco, alcohol, and ultra-processed food and drink industries. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1653	the perils of ignoring history: big tobacco played dirty and millions died. how similar is big food?
med-1654	manufactured uncertainty: protecting public health in the age of contested science and product defense. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1655	an archaeologic dig: a rice-fruit diet reverses ecg changes in hypertension. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1656	prevalence of low back pain in children and adolescents: a meta-analysis
med-1657	prevalence of stenotic changes in arteries supplying the lumbar spine. a postmortem angiographic study on 140 subjects
med-1658	correlation of diffusion in lumbar intervertebral disks with occlusion of lumbar arteries: a study in adult volunteers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1659	classification of age-related changes in lumbar intervertebral discs: 2002 volvo award in basic science. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1660	serum lipids in relation to sciatica among finns. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1661	lumbar disc degeneration: correlation with age, sex, and spine level in 600 autopsy specimens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1662	atherosclerosis and disc degeneration/low-back pain--a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1663	mr aortography and serum cholesterol levels in patients with long-term nonspecific lower back pain. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1664	degeneration of the intervertebral disc
med-1665	symptomatic disc herniation and serum lipid levels
med-1666	nutrition of the intervertebral disc. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1667	non-specific low back pain. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1668	review of postcontrast mri studies on diffusion of human lumbar discs. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1669	the effect of two energy-restricted diets, a low-fructose diet versus a moderate natural fructose diet, on weight loss and metabolic syndrome param... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1670	polyphenols and phenolic acids from strawberry and apple decrease glucose uptake and transport by human intestinal caco-2 cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1671	postprandial glucose, insulin, and free fatty acid responses to sucrose consumed with blackcurrants and lingonberries in healthy women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1672	sugar, uric acid, and the etiology of diabetes and obesity
med-1673	dietary polyphenols decrease glucose uptake by human intestinal caco-2 cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1674	fructose: it’s “alcohol without the buzz”
med-1675	industrial, not fruit fructose intake is associated with the severity of liver fibrosis in genotype 1 chronic hepatitis c patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1676	berries reduce postprandial insulin responses to wheat and rye breads in healthy women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1677	primary prevention of stroke by healthy lifestyle
med-1678	combined effect of low-risk dietary and lifestyle behaviors in primary prevention of myocardial infarction in women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1679	healthy lifestyle factors in the primary prevention of coronary heart disease among men: benefits among users and nonusers of lipid-lowering and an... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1680	effect of potentially modifiable risk factors associated with myocardial infarction in 52 countries (the interheart study): case-control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1681	diet, lifestyle, and the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus in women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1682	supplementation of a western diet with golden kiwifruits (actinidia chinensis var.'hort 16a':) effects on biomarkers of oxidation damage and antioxidant protection
med-1683	platelets and atherogenesis: platelet anti-aggregation activity and endothelial protection from tomatoes (solanum lycopersicum l.)
med-1684	strawberry extract presents antiplatelet activity by inhibition of inflammatory mediator of atherosclerosis (sp-selectin, scd40l, rantes, and il-1β... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1685	effects of tomato extract on human platelet aggregation in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1686	cardioprotective properties of kiwifruit. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1687	inhibitory effect of aqueous extracts of some herbs on human platelet aggregation in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1688	effects of tomato extract on platelet function: a double-blinded crossover study in healthy humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1689	effect of tomato industrial processing on phenolic profile and antiplatelet activity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1690	effects of antiplatelet components of tomato extract on platelet function in vitro and ex vivo: a time-course cannulation study in healthy humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1691	diet and thrombosis risk: nutrients for prevention of thrombotic disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1692	platelet dysfunction in vascular pathologies and how can it be treated. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1693	tomatoes and cardiovascular health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1694	dietary components and human platelet activity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1695	effects of kiwi fruit consumption on platelet aggregation and plasma lipids in healthy human volunteers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1696	gender, race, and diet affect platelet function tests in normal subjects contributing to a high rate of abnormal results
med-1697	effect of tomato industrial processing (different hybrids, paste, and pomace) on inhibition of platelet function in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo
med-1698	the projected impact of risk factor reduction on alzheimer's disease prevalence
med-1699	mediterranean diet, cognitive function, and dementia: a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1700	dietary fat types and 4-year cognitive change in community-dwelling older women
med-1701	strawberry extract presents antiplatelet activity by inhibition of inflammatory mediator of atherosclerosis (sp-selectin, scd40l, rantes, and il-1β... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1702	mediterranean diet and alzheimer disease mortality
med-1703	the projected impact of risk factor reduction on alzheimer's disease prevalence
med-1704	alzheimer's disease is incurable but preventable. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1705	a turning point for alzheimer's disease? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1706	the glycemic index: physiological mechanisms relating to obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1707	dietary sugar and body weight: have we reached a crisis in the epidemic of obesity and diabetes?: health be damned! pour on the sugar. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1708	dietary sugars intake and cardiovascular health: a scientific statement from the american heart association. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1709	dietary sugar and body weight: have we reached a crisis in the epidemic of obesity and diabetes?: we have, but the pox on sugar is overwrought and ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1710	energy and fructose from beverages sweetened with sugar or high-fructose corn syrup pose a health risk for some people
med-1711	figitumumab combined with carboplatin and paclitaxel in treatment-naïve japanese patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer
med-1712	dietary restriction reduces insulin-like growth factor i levels, which modulates apoptosis, cell proliferation, and tumor progression in p53-defici... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1713	facing the facelessness of public health: what's the public got to do with it? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1714	long-term low-protein, low-calorie diet and endurance exercise modulate metabolic factors associated with cancer risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1715	long-term effects of calorie or protein restriction on serum igf-1 and igfbp-3 concentration in humans
med-1716	a twenty-first century cancer epidemic caused by obesity: the involvement of insulin, diabetes, and insulin-like growth factors
med-1717	body-mass index and incidence of cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective observational studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1718	obesity as a major risk factor for cancer
med-1719	patients with congenital deficiency of igf-i seem protected from the development of malignancies: a preliminary report. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1720	insulin-like growth factor (igf)-i, igf binding protein-3, and cancer risk: systematic review and meta-regression analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1721	cancer incidence and mortality in relation to body mass index in the million women study: cohort study
med-1722	insulin-like growth factor-1 and childhood cancer risk
med-1723	the associations of diet with serum insulin-like growth factor i and its main binding proteins in 292 women meat-eaters, vegetarians, and vegans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1724	a low-fat, whole-food vegan diet, as well as other strategies that down-regulate igf-i activity, may slow the human aging process. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1725	integrative assessment of multiple pesticides as risk factors for non-hodgkin's lymphoma among men
med-1726	major pesticides are more toxic to human cells than their declared active principles
med-1727	facing the facelessness of public health: what's the public got to do with it? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1728	epidemiologic studies of glyphosate and cancer: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1729	birth defects, season of conception, and sex of children born to pesticide applicators living in the red river valley of minnesota, usa.
med-1730	epidemiologic studies of glyphosate and non-cancer health outcomes: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1731	glyphosate herbicide formulation: a potentially lethal ingestion. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1732	glyphosate induces human breast cancer cells growth via estrogen receptors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1733	rhabdomyolysis from an intramuscular injection of glyphosate-surfactant herbicide. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1734	developmental and reproductive outcomes in humans and animals after glyphosate exposure: a critical analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1735	compositional differences in soybeans on the market: glyphosate accumulates in roundup ready gm soybeans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1736	prepubertal exposure to commercial formulation of the herbicide glyphosate alters testosterone levels and testicular morphology. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1737	time- and dose-dependent effects of roundup on human embryonic and placental cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1738	developmental and reproductive outcomes in humans and animals after glyphosate exposure: a critical analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1739	roundup disrupts male reproductive functions by triggering calcium-mediated cell death in rat testis and sertoli cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1740	pesticide roundup provokes cell division dysfunction at the level of cdk1/cyclin b activation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1741	differential effects of glyphosate and roundup on human placental cells and aromatase
med-1742	maternal and fetal exposure to pesticides associated to genetically modified foods in eastern townships of quebec, canada. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1743	compositional differences in soybeans on the market: glyphosate accumulates in roundup ready gm soybeans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1744	property rights and genetic engineering: developing nations at risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1745	chemical composition of glyphosate-tolerant soybean 40-3-2 grown in europe remains equivalent with that of conventional soybean (glycine max l.). - pubmed - ncbi
med-1746	the impact of altered herbicide residues in transgenic herbicide-resistant crops on standard setting for herbicide residues. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1747	is there a legacy of the u.s. public health syphilis study at tuskegee in hiv/aids-related beliefs among heterosexual african-americans and latinos?
med-1748	complete genes may pass from food to human blood
med-1749	maternal and fetal exposure to pesticides associated to genetically modified foods in eastern townships of quebec, canada. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1750	clinical, agricultural, and evolutionary biology of myostatin: a comparative review
med-1751	commercial conspiracy theories: a pilot study
med-1752	regulation of skeletal muscle mass in mice by a new tgf-beta superfamily member. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1753	the current state of gmo governance: are we ready for gm animals? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1754	recursive fury: conspiracist ideation in the blogosphere in response to research on conspiracist ideation
med-1755	occurrence of livestock-associated methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus in turkey and broiler barns and contamination of air and soil surfaces in their vicinity
med-1756	high-density livestock operations, crop field application of manure, and risk of community-associated methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus infection, pennsylvania, usa
med-1757	longitudinal study of the contamination of air and of soil surfaces in the vicinity of pig barns by livestock-associated methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus
med-1758	antibiotic resistance-the need for global solutions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1759	livestock-associated methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus responsible for human colonization and infection in an area of italy with high density of pig farming
med-1760	effects of fast food branding on young children's taste preferences. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1761	marketing fast food: impact of fast food restaurants in children's hospitals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1762	meat intake and reproductive parameters among young men
med-1763	the sensitivity of the child to sex steroids: possible impact of exogenous estrogens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1764	lipid concentrations and semen quality: the life study
med-1765	effects of simvastatin and pravastatin on gonadal function in male hypercholesterolemic patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1766	lipids and testicular function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1767	dairy intake and semen quality among men attending a fertility clinic
med-1768	is milk responsible for male reproductive disorders? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1769	role of environmental estrogens in the deterioration of male factor fertility. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1770	possible health impact of animal oestrogens in food. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1771	some observations on human semen analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1772	high dietary intake of saturated fat is associated with reduced semen quality among 701 young danish men from the general population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1773	dairy food intake in relation to semen quality and reproductive hormone levels among physically active young men
med-1774	a national survey of persistent, bioaccumulative, and toxic (pbt) pollutants in the united states milk supply. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1775	comparison of individual antioxidants of sperm and seminal plasma in fertile and infertile men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1776	semen quality trends in french regions are consistent with a global change in environmental exposure. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1777	shedding light on the controversy surrounding the temporal decline in human sperm counts: a systematic review
med-1778	dairy intake and semen quality among men attending a fertility clinic
med-1779	the reactive oxygen species-total antioxidant capacity score is a new measure of oxidative stress to predict male infertility. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1780	what has happened to human fertility? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1781	high dietary intake of saturated fat is associated with reduced semen quality among 701 young danish men from the general population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1782	antioxidants to reduce sperm dna fragmentation: an unexpected adverse effect. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1783	semen quality in relation to antioxidant intake in a healthy male population
med-1784	association between sperm quality, oxidative stress, and seminal antioxidant activity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1785	walnuts improve semen quality in men consuming a western-style diet: randomized control dietary intervention trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1786	good semen quality and life expectancy: a cohort study of 43,277 men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1787	evidence for decreasing quality of semen during past 50 years.
med-1788	micronutrients intake is associated with improved sperm dna quality in older men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1789	nonextractable polyphenols, usually ignored, are the major part of dietary polyphenols: a study on the spanish diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1790	reducing childhood obesity by eliminating 100% fruit juice
med-1791	a combination of prebiotic short- and long-chain inulin-type fructans enhances calcium absorption and bone mineralization in young adolescents. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1792	intake of whole apples or clear apple juice has contrasting effects on plasma lipids in healthy volunteers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1793	concept and health-related properties of nonextractable polyphenols: the missing dietary polyphenols. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1794	dietary roles of non-starch polysaccharides in human nutrition: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1795	fruit consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes: results from three prospective longitudinal cohort studies
med-1796	association of adenovirus 36 infection with obesity and metabolic markers in humans: a meta-analysis of observational studies
med-1797	comparative genome analysis with the human genome reveals chicken genes associated with fatness and body weight. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1798	adenovirus 36 infection and obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1799	adipogenic human adenovirus ad-36 induces commitment, differentiation, and lipid accumulation in human adipose-derived stem cells
med-1800	adenovirus-36 is associated with obesity in children and adults in sweden as determined by rapid elisa
med-1801	modern organic and broiler chickens sold for human consumption provide more energy from fat than protein. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1802	longitudinal changes in bmi in older adults are associated with meat consumption differentially, by type of meat consumed. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1803	a framework for identification of infections that contribute to human obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1804	human adenovirus-36 and childhood obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1805	association of adenovirus infection with human obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1806	long-term changes in adiposity and glycemic control are associated with past adenovirus infection
med-1807	intake of total, animal and plant protein and subsequent changes in weight or waist circumference in european men and women: the diogenes project. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1808	human adenovirus-36 antibody status is associated with obesity in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1809	effect of adenovirus infection on adiposity in chicken. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1810	transmissibility of adenovirus-induced adiposity in a chicken model. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1811	a phase i study investigating the safety and pharmacokinetics of highly bioavailable curcumin (theracurmin) in cancer patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1812	dietary habits and past medical history as related to fatal pancreas cancer risk among adventists. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1813	phase ii trial of curcumin in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1814	dietary patterns and risk of pancreatic cancer in a large population-based case-control study in the san francisco bay area
med-1815	dietary mutagen exposure and risk of pancreatic cancer
med-1816	dietary fatty acids and pancreatic cancer in the nih-aarp diet and health study
med-1817	meat and fish consumption and risk of pancreatic cancer: results from the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1818	nutrient-based dietary patterns and pancreatic cancer risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1819	potentiation of gemcitabine by turmeric force in pancreatic cancer cell lines. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1820	gemcitabine plus erlotinib for advanced pancreatic cancer: a systematic review with meta-analysis
med-1821	reduction in ki-67 in benign breast tissue of high risk women with the lignan secoisolariciresinol diglycoside (sdg)
med-1822	antiproliferative activity of lignans against the breast carcinoma cell lines mcf 7 and bt 20. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1823	role of dietary lignans in the reduction of breast cancer risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1824	dietary lignan intakes in relation to survival among women with breast cancer: the western new york exposures and breast cancer (web) study
med-1825	flax and breast cancer: a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1826	consumption of flaxseed, a rich source of lignans, is associated with reduced breast cancer risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1827	in vitro anti-metastatic activity of enterolactone, a mammalian lignan derived from flax lignan, and down-regulation of matrix metalloproteinases i... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1828	quantitative determination of lignans and isoflavonoids in plasma of omnivorous and vegetarian women by isotope dilution gas chromatography-mass sp... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1829	estradiol, tamoxifen, and flaxseed alter il-1β and il-1ra levels in normal human breast tissue in vivo. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1830	exploration of 100 commonly used drugs and supplements on cognition in older adults
med-1831	children's daily exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls from dietary supplements containing fish oils. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1832	visual acuity and the essentiality of docosahexaenoic acid and arachidonic acid in the diet of term infants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1833	cod liver oil intake and incidence of asthma in norwegian adults--the hunt study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1834	the role of latitude, ultraviolet radiation exposure and vitamin d in childhood asthma and hayfever: an australian multicenter study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1835	visual acuity and cognitive outcomes at 4 years of age in a double-blind, randomized trial of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid-supplemented in... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1836	longitudinal changes of manganese-dependent superoxide dismutase and other indexes of manganese and iron status in women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1837	dietary manganese intake and type of lipid do not affect clinical or neuropsychological measures in healthy young women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1838	aluminium and other elements in selected herbal tea plant species and their infusions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1839	gastrointestinal absorption of aluminium from single doses of aluminium containing antacids in man. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1840	influence of tea drinking on manganese intake, manganese status and leucocyte expression of mnsod and cytosolic aminopeptidase p. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1841	dietary citric acid enhances absorption of aluminum in antacids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1842	the effect of sour tea (hibiscus sabdariffa) on essential hypertension. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1843	aluminium in over-the-counter drugs: risks outweigh benefits? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1844	determination of total aluminum, chromium, copper, iron, manganese, and nickel and their fractions leached to the infusions of black tea, green tea... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1845	plasma levels of aluminium after tea ingestion in healthy volunteers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1846	the effects of fruit juices and fruits on the absorption of iron from a rice meal. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1847	gastro-intestinal availability of aluminium from tea. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1848	neurotoxic effects of aluminium among foundry workers and alzheimer's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1849	aluminum involvement in the progression of alzheimer's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1850	urine levels of aluminum after drinking tea. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1851	aluminum and alzheimer's disease: after a century of controversy, is there a plausible link? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1852	aluminium migration into beverages: are dented cans safe? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1853	erosive potentials of brewed teas. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1854	effectiveness and tolerability of a standardized extract from hibiscus sabdariffa in patients with mild to moderate hypertension: a controlled and ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1855	hibiscus sabdariffa l. in the treatment of hypertension and hyperlipidemia: a comprehensive review of animal and human studies
med-1856	dietary behavior and knowledge of dental erosion among chinese adults
med-1857	periodontal conditions in vegetarians: a clinical study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1858	influence of drinking patterns of carbonated beverages on dental erosion. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1859	roselle (hibiscus sabdariffa l.) and soybean oil effects on quality characteristics of pork patties studied by response surface methodology. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1860	the effects of sour tea (hibiscus sabdariffa) on hypertension in patients with type ii diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1861	the effectiveness of hibiscus sabdariffa in the treatment of hypertension: a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1862	effects of comprehensive lifestyle modification on diet, weight, physical fitness, and blood pressure control: 18-month results of a randomized trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1863	vegetarian diets and blood pressure: a meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1864	hibiscus sabdariffa l. in the treatment of hypertension and hyperlipidemia: a comprehensive review of animal and human studies
med-1865	hibiscus sabdariffa l. tea (tisane) lowers blood pressure in prehypertensive and mildly hypertensive adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1866	hibiscus sabdariffa extract lowers blood pressure and improves endothelial function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1867	effects of sour tea (hibiscus sabdariffa) on lipid profile and lipoproteins in patients with type ii diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1868	hibiscus sabdariffa extract inhibits obesity and fat accumulation, and improves liver steatosis in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1869	the relationship between dietary protein intake and blood pressure: results from the premier study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1870	vegetarian diets and incidence of diabetes in the adventist health study-2
med-1871	effectiveness and tolerability of a standardized extract from hibiscus sabdariffa in patients with mild to moderate hypertension: a controlled and ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1872	effects of comprehensive lifestyle modification on blood pressure control: main results of the premier clinical trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1873	dietary saturated fat intake is negatively associated with weight maintenance among the premier participants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1874	the garden of eden--plant based diets, the genetic drive to conserve cholesterol and its implications for heart disease in the 21st century. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1875	prediabetes: a high-risk state for developing diabetes
med-1876	consumption of whole grain reduces risk of deteriorating glucose tolerance, including progression to prediabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1877	the early treatment of type 2 diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1878	crossing the quality chasm: a new health system for the 21st century - pubmed - ncbi
med-1879	daily flaxseed consumption improves glycemic control in obese men and women with pre-diabetes: a randomized study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1880	effect of cooking and germination on phenolic composition and biological properties of dark beans (phaseolus vulgaris l.). - pubmed - ncbi
med-1881	lower intake of vegetables and legumes associated with cognitive decline among illiterate elderly chinese: a 3-year cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1882	low-density lipoprotein and high-density lipoprotein particle subclasses predict coronary events and are favorably changed by gemfibrozil therapy i... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1883	a 12-wk egg intervention increases serum zeaxanthin and macular pigment optical density in women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1884	maintenance of the ldl cholesterol:hdl cholesterol ratio in an elderly population given a dietary cholesterol challenge. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1885	rethinking dietary cholesterol. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1886	lipoprotein particle profiles by nuclear magnetic resonance compared with standard lipids and apolipoproteins in predicting incident cardiovascular disease in women
med-1887	what is the role of advanced lipoprotein analysis in practice? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1888	intestinal microbial metabolism of phosphatidylcholine and cardiovascular risk
med-1889	consumption of eggs with meals increases the susceptibility of human plasma and low-density lipoprotein to lipid peroxidation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1890	dietary cholesterol from eggs increases the ratio of total cholesterol to high-density lipoprotein cholesterol in humans: a meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1891	early life stress and telomere length: investigating the connection and possible mechanisms
med-1892	work-related exhaustion and telomere length: a population-based study
med-1893	the association between physical activity in leisure time and leukocyte telomere length. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1894	effect of healthy lifestyle behaviors on the association between leukocyte telomere length and coronary artery calcium. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1895	intensive meditation training, immune cell telomerase activity, and psychological mediators. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1896	human telomerase model shows the role of the ten domain in advancing the double helix for the next polymerization step
med-1897	look ahead (action for health in diabetes): design and methods for a clinical trial of weight loss for the prevention of cardiovascular disease in ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1898	intake of small-to-medium-chain saturated fatty acids is associated with peripheral leukocyte telomere length in postmenopausal women
med-1899	stress and telomere biology: a lifespan perspective
med-1900	loving-kindness meditation practice associated with longer telomeres in women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1901	saturated fatty acid metabolism is key link between cell division, cancer, and senescence in cellular and whole organism aging
med-1902	increased telomerase activity and comprehensive lifestyle changes: a pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1903	habitual physical exercise has beneficial effects on telomere length in postmenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1904	dietary patterns, food groups, and telomere length in the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis (mesa)
med-1905	telomeres, lifestyle, cancer, and aging
med-1906	a pilot study of yogic meditation for family dementia caregivers with depressive symptoms: effects on mental health, cognition, and telomerase activity
med-1907	leukocyte telomere length and its relation to food and nutrient intake in an elderly population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1908	accelerated telomere erosion is associated with a declining immune function of caregivers of alzheimer’s disease patients
med-1909	exposure to violence during childhood is associated with telomere erosion from 5 to 10 years of age: a longitudinal study
med-1910	from the cover: accelerated telomere shortening in response to life stress
med-1911	independent and combined effects of dietary weight loss and exercise on leukocyte telomere length in postmenopausal women
med-1912	diet-related telomere shortening and chromosome stability
med-1913	physical exercise prevents cellular senescence in circulating leukocytes and in the vessel wall. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1914	early life stress and telomere length: investigating the connection and possible mechanisms
med-1915	work-related exhaustion and telomere length: a population-based study
med-1916	the association between physical activity in leisure time and leukocyte telomere length. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1917	effect of healthy lifestyle behaviors on the association between leukocyte telomere length and coronary artery calcium. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1918	intensive meditation training, immune cell telomerase activity, and psychological mediators. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1919	human telomerase model shows the role of the ten domain in advancing the double helix for the next polymerization step
med-1920	look ahead (action for health in diabetes): design and methods for a clinical trial of weight loss for the prevention of cardiovascular disease in ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1921	intake of small-to-medium-chain saturated fatty acids is associated with peripheral leukocyte telomere length in postmenopausal women
med-1922	stress and telomere biology: a lifespan perspective
med-1923	loving-kindness meditation practice associated with longer telomeres in women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1924	saturated fatty acid metabolism is key link between cell division, cancer, and senescence in cellular and whole organism aging
med-1925	increased telomerase activity and comprehensive lifestyle changes: a pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1926	habitual physical exercise has beneficial effects on telomere length in postmenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1927	dietary patterns, food groups, and telomere length in the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis (mesa)
med-1928	telomeres, lifestyle, cancer, and aging
med-1929	a pilot study of yogic meditation for family dementia caregivers with depressive symptoms: effects on mental health, cognition, and telomerase activity
med-1930	leukocyte telomere length and its relation to food and nutrient intake in an elderly population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1931	accelerated telomere erosion is associated with a declining immune function of caregivers of alzheimer’s disease patients
med-1932	exposure to violence during childhood is associated with telomere erosion from 5 to 10 years of age: a longitudinal study
med-1933	from the cover: accelerated telomere shortening in response to life stress
med-1934	independent and combined effects of dietary weight loss and exercise on leukocyte telomere length in postmenopausal women
med-1935	diet-related telomere shortening and chromosome stability
med-1936	physical exercise prevents cellular senescence in circulating leukocytes and in the vessel wall. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1937	effects of turmeric on alzheimer's disease with behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia
med-1938	multitargeting by turmeric, the golden spice: from kitchen to clinic. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1939	oral curcumin for alzheimer's disease: tolerability and efficacy in a 24-week randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled study
med-1940	therapeutic potential of turmeric in alzheimer's disease: curcumin or curcuminoids? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1941	curcuminoids enhance amyloid-beta uptake by macrophages of alzheimer's disease patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1942	curry consumption and cognitive function in the elderly. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1943	therapeutic potential of turmeric in alzheimer's disease: curcumin or curcuminoids? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1944	incidence of alzheimer's disease in a rural community in india: the indo-us study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1945	prevalence of alzheimer's disease and other dementias in rural india: the indo-us study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1946	dietary turmeric potentially reduces the risk of cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1947	role of curcumin in idiopathic inflammatory orbital pseudotumours. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1948	curcumin and neurodegenerative diseases
med-1949	is very preterm birth a risk factor for adult cardiometabolic disease? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1950	intakes of garlic and dried fruits are associated with lower risk of spontaneous preterm delivery
med-1951	late preterm birth: a review of medical and neuropsychological childhood outcomes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1952	growing up after extremely preterm birth: lifespan mental health outcomes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1953	antimicrobial properties of allium sativum (garlic). - pubmed - ncbi
med-1954	preterm birth and behaviour problems in infants and preschool-age children: a review of the recent literature. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1955	maternal dietary patterns and preterm delivery: results from large prospective cohort study
med-1956	elevated tcdd in chicken eggs and farm-raised catfish fed a diet with ball clay from a southern united states mine. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1957	pcdd and pcdf contamination in catfish feed from arkansas, usa. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1958	congener-specific levels of dioxins and dibenzofurans in u.s. food and estimated daily dioxin toxic equivalent intake.
med-1959	dioxin congener patterns in commercial catfish from the united states and the indication of mineral clays as the potential source. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1960	pcdd, pcdf, and pcb in farm-raised catfish from southeast united states--concentrations, sources, and cyp1a induction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1961	reducing exposure to dioxins and related compounds through foods in the next generation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1962	the concentration and distribution of 2,3,7,8-dibenzo-p-dioxins/-furans in chickens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1963	polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (pcdd/pcdf) in food samples collected in southern mississippi, usa. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1964	prevalence of physical activity and obesity in us counties, 2001–2011: a road map for action
med-1965	agricultural policies, food and public health
med-1966	effects of dietary cholesterol on serum cholesterol: a meta-analysis and review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1967	atherogenesis: a postprandial phenomenon. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1968	effects of increasing amounts of dietary cholesterol on postprandial lipemia and lipoproteins in human subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1969	effect of a very-high-fiber vegetable, fruit, and nut diet on serum lipids and colonic function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1970	medical nutrition therapy for hypercholesterolemia positively affects patient satisfaction and quality of life outcomes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1971	a global survey of physicians' perceptions on cholesterol management: the from the heart study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1972	cross-analysis of dietary prescriptions and adherence in 356 hypercholesterolaemic patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1973	the new pathophysiology of coronary artery disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1974	improvements in hostility and depression in relation to dietary change and cholesterol lowering. the family heart study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1975	cherry consumption and the risk of recurrent gout attacks
med-1976	cherries and health: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1977	colonization of butchers with livestock-associated methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1978	high-density livestock operations, crop field application of manure, and risk of community-associated methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus infection, pennsylvania, usa
med-1979	from pig to pork: methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus in the pork production chain. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1980	rapid detection of extended-spectrum-β-lactamase-producing enterobacteriaceae
med-1981	antibiotic resistance-the need for global solutions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1982	contamination of hands with methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus after contact with environmental surfaces and after contact with the skin o... - pubmed - ncbi
med-1983	transfer of methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus from retail pork products onto food contact surfaces and the potential for consumer exposure. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1984	the early treatment of type 2 diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1985	attained height of lacto-ovo vegetarian children and adolescents. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1986	long-term morbidity and mortality of overweight adolescents. a follow-up of the harvard growth study of 1922 to 1935. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1987	management of type 2 diabetes mellitus in children and adolescents. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1988	pediatrician's role in screening and treatment: bullying, prediabetes, oral health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1989	strategies for preventing type 2 diabetes: an update for clinicians
med-1990	intensive versus conventional glucose control in critically ill patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1991	plant foods and plant-based diets: protective against childhood obesity? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1992	prediabetes: a high-risk state for developing diabetes
med-1993	type 2 diabetes mellitus in children and adolescents
med-1994	prediabetes and type 2 diabetes in youth: an emerging epidemic disease? - pubmed - ncbi
med-1995	the perils of ignoring history: big tobacco played dirty and millions died. how similar is big food?
med-1996	childhood obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1997	vegetarian diets and childhood obesity prevention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1998	the early treatment of type 2 diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-1999	strategies for preventing type 2 diabetes: an update for clinicians
med-2000	projection of the year 2050 burden of diabetes in the us adult population: dynamic modeling of incidence, mortality, and prediabetes prevalence
med-2001	awareness of prediabetes--united states, 2005-2010. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2002	prevention of type 2 diabetes mellitus by changes in lifestyle among subjects with impaired glucose tolerance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2003	reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin
med-2004	creating public awareness: state 2025 diabetes forecasts. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2005	microvascular complications. retinopathy and nephropathy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2006	identification of peptide hormones of the amphipathic helix class using the helical hydrophobic moment algorithm. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2007	prevention of diabetes and reduction in major cardiovascular events in studies of subjects with prediabetes: meta-analysis of randomised controlled... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2008	a pulse-based diet is effective for reducing total and ldl-cholesterol in older adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2009	nutritional quality and health benefits of chickpea (cicer arietinum l.): a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2010	nutritional quality of legumes, and their role in cardiometabolic risk prevention: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2011	exploratory study of the relationship between hypertension and diet diversity among saba islanders.
med-2012	non-celiac gluten sensitivity: literature review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2013	celiac disease, wheat allergy, and gluten sensitivity: when gluten free is not a fad. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2014	characteristics of patients who avoid wheat and/or gluten in the absence of celiac disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2015	characterization of adults with a self-diagnosis of nonceliac gluten sensitivity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2016	economic burden of a gluten-free diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2017	non-celiac gluten sensitivity. is it in the gluten or the grain? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2018	spectrum of gluten-related disorders: consensus on new nomenclature and classification
med-2019	effect of wheat gluten hydrolysate on the immune system in healthy human subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2020	effect of wheat bran on serum lipids: influence of particle size and wheat protein. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2021	celiac disease: management of persistent symptoms in patients on a gluten-free diet
med-2022	whole grains and human health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2023	non-celiac gluten sensitivity: literature review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2024	cutting-edge issues in celiac disease and in gluten intolerance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2025	nonceliac gluten sensitivity: sense or sensibility? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2026	the prevalence of celiac disease in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2027	characterization of adults with a self-diagnosis of nonceliac gluten sensitivity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2028	reactivity to dietary gluten: new insights into differential diagnosis among gluten‑related gastrointestinal disorders. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2029	gluten contamination of naturally gluten-free flours and starches used by canadians with celiac disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2030	an italian prospective multicenter survey on patients suspected of having non-celiac gluten sensitivity
med-2031	non-celiac gluten sensitivity: clinical relevance and recommendations for future research. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2032	non-celiac wheat sensitivity diagnosed by double-blind placebo-controlled challenge: exploring a new clinical entity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2033	non-celiac gluten sensitivity: literature review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2034	nonceliac gluten sensitivity: sense or sensibility? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2035	gluten-sensitive diarrhea without evidence of celiac disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2036	sensitivity-related illness: the escalating pandemic of allergy, food intolerance and chemical sensitivity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2037	non-celiac gluten sensitivity. is it in the gluten or the grain? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2038	absence of somatization in non-coeliac gluten sensitivity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2039	randomised clinical trial: gluten may cause depression in subjects with non-coeliac gluten sensitivity - an exploratory clinical study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2040	gluten causes gastrointestinal symptoms in subjects without celiac disease: a double-blind randomized placebo-controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2041	coeliac disease - new pathophysiological findings and their implications for therapy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2042	position statement. part one: immune function and exercise. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2043	natural killer cell activity in peripheral blood of highly trained and untrained persons. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2044	can exercise-related improvements in immunity influence cancer prevention and prognosis in the elderly? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2045	aging of hepatitis c virus (hcv)-infected persons in the united states: a multiple cohort model of hcv prevalence and disease progression. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2046	efficacy and safety of chlorella supplementation in adults with chronic hepatitis c virus infection
med-2047	physical activity and immune function in elderly women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2048	salivary secretory immunoglobulin a secretion increases after 4-weeks ingestion of chlorella-derived multicomponent supplement in humans: a randomized cross over study
med-2049	beneficial immunostimulatory effect of short-term chlorella supplementation: enhancement of natural killer cell activity and early inflammatory response (randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial)
med-2050	the effects of moderate exercise training on natural killer cells and acute upper respiratory tract infections. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2051	economic evaluation of direct-acting antiviral therapy in chronic hepatitis c. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2052	managing adverse effects and complications in completing treatment for hepatitis c virus infection. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2053	cow's-milk-free diet as a therapeutic option in childhood chronic constipation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2054	prevalence, symptoms and outcome of constipation in infants and toddlers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2055	intolerance of cow's milk and chronic constipation in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2056	cow's milk allergy is a major contributor in recurrent perianal dermatitis of infants
med-2057	the role of cow's milk allergy in pediatric chronic constipation: a randomized clinical trial
med-2058	cows milk consumption in constipation and anal fissure in infants and young children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2059	review article: chronic constipation and food hypersensitivity--an intriguing relationship. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2060	cow's milk protein intolerance and chronic constipation in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2061	chronic constipation as a symptom of cow milk allergy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2062	oligo-antigenic diet in the treatment of chronic anal fissures. evidence for a relationship between food hypersensitivity and anal fissures. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2063	food intolerance and chronic constipation: manometry and histology study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2064	anti-proliferative activity and chemoprotective effects towards dna oxidative damage of fresh and cooked brassicaceae. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2065	protective effect of sulforaphane against oxidative stress: recent advances. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2066	glucosinolates in brassica vegetables: the influence of the food supply chain on intake, bioavailability and human health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2067	sulforaphane as a promising molecule for fighting cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2068	isothiocyanate concentrations and interconversion of sulforaphane to erucin in human subjects after consumption of commercial frozen broccoli compa... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2069	sulforaphane can protect lens cells against oxidative stress: implications for cataract prevention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2070	broccoli sprouts: an exceptionally rich source of inducers of enzymes that protect against chemical carcinogens
med-2071	the potential to intensify sulforaphane formation in cooked broccoli (brassica oleracea var. italica) using mustard seeds (sinapis alba). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2072	bioavailability and kinetics of sulforaphane in humans after consumption of cooked versus raw broccoli. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2073	antiproliferative effects of fresh and thermal processed green and red cultivars of curly kale (brassica oleracea l. convar. acephala var. sabellica). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2074	modifying the processing and handling of frozen broccoli for increased sulforaphane formation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2075	multi-targeted prevention of cancer by sulforaphane
med-2076	favorable effects of berry consumption on platelet function, blood pressure, and hdl cholesterol. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2077	platelet dysfunction in vascular pathologies and how can it be treated. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2078	dietary components and human platelet activity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2079	one-month strawberry-rich anthocyanin supplementation ameliorates cardiovascular risk, oxidative stress markers and platelet activation in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2080	platelets in atherosclerosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2081	a comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990–2010: a systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2010
med-2082	global and regional mortality from 235 causes of death for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: a systematic analysis for the global burden of disease s... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2083	grape juice, but not orange juice or grapefruit juice, inhibits human platelet aggregation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2084	the state of us health, 1990-2010: burden of diseases, injuries, and risk factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2085	antiplatelet, anticoagulant, and fibrinolytic activity in vitro of extracts from selected fruits and vegetables. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2086	the medicalisation of 'tall' girls: a discourse analysis of medical literature on the use of synthetic oestrogen to reduce female height. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2087	diethylstilboestrol--a long-term legacy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2088	arsenic species in poultry feather meal. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2089	genotoxicity of two mouthwash products in the drosophila wing-spot test. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2090	do endodontic compounds induce genetic damage? a comprehensive review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2091	comparison of the effectiveness of 0.5% tea, 2% neem and 0.2% chlorhexidine mouthwashes on oral health: a randomized control trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2092	cytotoxicity of mouthrinses on epithelial cells by micronucleus test
med-2093	chlorhexidine (chx) in dentistry: state of the art. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2094	a pilot study of the role of green tea use on oral health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2095	monitoring of buccal epithelial cells by alkaline comet assay (single cell gel electrophoresis technique) in cytogenetic evaluation of chlorhexidine. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2096	emerging science in the dietary control and prevention of dental caries. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2097	nutritional intervention in patients with periodontal disease: clinical, immunological and microbiological variables during 12 months. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2098	steam cooking significantly improves in vitro bile acid binding of collard greens, kale, mustard greens, broccoli, green bell pepper, and cabbage. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2099	in vitro binding capacities of three dietary fibers and their mixture for four toxic elements, cholesterol, and bile acid. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2100	cytological abnormalities in nipple aspirates of breast fluid from women with severe constipation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2101	breast-gut connection: origin of chenodeoxycholic acid in breast cyst fluid. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2102	bile acids influence the growth, oestrogen receptor and oestrogen-regulated proteins of mcf-7 human breast cancer cells.
med-2103	plasma deoxycholic acid concentration is elevated in postmenopausal women with newly diagnosed breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2104	effect of a very-high-fiber vegetable, fruit, and nut diet on serum lipids and colonic function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2105	recent perspectives on the relations between fecal mutagenicity, genotoxicity, and diet
med-2106	bile acids as carcinogens in human gastrointestinal cancers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2107	the metabolic consequences of slow colonic transit. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2108	diet, nutrition intake, and metabolism in populations at high and low risk for colon cancer. nutrient intake. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2109	extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and conventional medical therapy in neonates with persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn: a prospecti... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2110	extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for newborn respiratory failure: forty-five cases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2111	updating a 12-year experience with arrest and reversal therapy for coronary heart disease (an overdue requiem for palliative cardiology). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2112	how evidence-based medicine biases physicians against nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2113	resolving the coronary artery disease epidemic through plant-based nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2114	potential role of foxo1 and mtorc1 in the pathogenesis of western diet-induced acne
med-2115	diet supplementation with donkey milk upregulates liver mitochondrial uncoupling, reduces energy efficiency and improves antioxidant and antiinflam... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2116	turning acne on/off via mtorc1
med-2117	diet in acne: further evidence for the role of nutrient signalling in acne pathogenesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2118	acne vulgaris: a disease of western civilization. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2119	how to save a life during a clinic visit for erectile dysfunction by modifying cardiovascular risk factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2120	acne and risk of prostate cancer
med-2121	dietary intervention in acne
med-2122	metabolic disorders and breast cancer risk (united states). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2123	milk is not just food but most likely a genetic transfection system activating mtorc1 signaling for postnatal growth
med-2124	acne: risk indicator for increased body mass index and insulin resistance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2125	the impact of cow's milk-mediated mtorc1-signaling in the initiation and progression of prostate cancer
med-2126	excessive leucine-mtorc1-signalling of cow milk-based infant formula: the missing link to understand early childhood obesity
med-2127	nutrient signaling to mtor and cell growth
med-2128	sirolimus for kaposi's sarcoma in renal-transplant recipients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2129	amino acid sensing mechanisms: an achilles heel in cancer? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2130	deconvoluting mtor biology
med-2131	mtorc1 activity as a determinant of cancer risk--rationalizing the cancer-preventive effects of adiponectin, metformin, rapamycin, and low-protein ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2132	mtorc1 signaling: what we still don't know. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2133	mtor is a key modulator of ageing and age-related disease
med-2134	mtor and cancer therapy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2135	fisetin regulates obesity by targeting mtorc1 signaling. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2136	the impact of cow's milk-mediated mtorc1-signaling in the initiation and progression of prostate cancer
med-2137	rapalogs in cancer prevention
med-2138	caloric restriction and incidence of breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2139	prognostic and therapeutic implications of mtorc1 and rictor expression in human breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2140	bean and rice meals reduce postprandial glycemic response in adults with type 2 diabetes: a cross-over study
med-2141	high intake of whole grains and beans pattern is inversely associated with insulin resistance in healthy korean adult population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2142	phytate in foods and significance for humans: food sources, intake, processing, bioavailability, protective role and analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2143	antidiabetic drugs used in europe prior to the discovery of insulin. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2144	beans and diabetes: phaseolus vulgaris preparations as antihyperglycemic agents. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2145	effect of non-oil-seed pulses on glycaemic control: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled experimental trials in people wi... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2146	antidiabetic potential of commonly consumed legumes: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2147	phaseolus beans: impact on glycaemic response and chronic disease risk in human subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2148	regular consumption of pulses for 8 weeks reduces metabolic syndrome risk factors in overweight and obese adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2149	legume intake is inversely associated with metabolic syndrome in adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2150	vegetable protein and vegetable fat intakes in pre-adolescent and adolescent girls, and risk for benign breast disease in young women
med-2151	intake of fiber and nuts during adolescence and incidence of proliferative benign breast disease
med-2152	mechanistic examination of walnuts in prevention of breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2153	nut consumption and risk of pancreatic cancer in women
med-2154	obesity-associated mechanisms of hepatocarcinogenesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2155	effects of habitual coffee consumption on cardiometabolic disease, cardiovascular health, and all-cause mortality. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2156	effects of coffee consumption in chronic hepatitis c: a randomized controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2157	hepatocellular carcinoma and other liver lesions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2158	consumption of coffee associated with reduced risk of liver cancer: a meta-analysis
med-2159	dose- and gender-dependent interactions between coffee consumption and serum ggt activity in alcohol consumers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2160	the association of coffee intake with liver cancer incidence and chronic liver disease mortality in male smokers
med-2161	coffee reduces risk for hepatocellular carcinoma: an updated meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2162	overweight, obesity, and mortality from cancer in a prospectively studied cohort of u.s. adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2163	the tromsø heart study: distribution of, and determinants for, gamma-glutamyltransferase in a free-living population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2164	how common is the most common adult movement disorder? update on the worldwide prevalence of essential tremor. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2165	elevated levels of harman and norharman in cerebrospinal fluid of parkinsonian patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2166	blood harmane (1-methyl-9h-pyrido[3,4-b]indole) concentrations in essential tremor: repeat observation in cases and controls in new york
med-2167	exploring the relationship between caffeine intake and essential tremor. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2168	quantification of the neurotoxic beta-carboline harmane in barbecued/grilled meat samples and correlation with level of doneness. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2169	relative exposure to beta-carbolines norharman and harman from foods and tobacco smoke. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2170	dietary epidemiology of essential tremor: meat consumption and meat cooking practices
med-2171	β-carboline alkaloids and essential tremor: exploring the environmental determinants of one of the most prevalent neurological diseases
med-2172	quantification of the co-mutagenic beta-carbolines, norharman and harman, in cigarette smoke condensates and cooked foods. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2173	mptp: an industrial chemical and contaminant of illicit narcotics stimulates a new era in research on parkinson's disease.
med-2174	cancer and blood concentrations of the co-mutagen harmane in essential tremor
med-2175	blood harmane is correlated with cerebellar metabolism in essential tremor: a pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2176	exposure to beta-carbolines norharman and harman. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2177	chronic parkinsonism in humans due to a product of meperidine-analog synthesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2178	blood harmane, blood lead, and severity of hand tremor: evidence of additive effects
med-2179	cooking frequency may enhance survival in taiwanese elderly. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2180	christmas 2012: research: nutritional content of supermarket ready meals and recipes by television chefs in the united kingdom: cross sectional study
med-2181	trends in energy intake among us children by eating location and food source, 1977–2006
med-2182	food, cooking skills, and health: a literature review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2183	impact of cooking and home food preparation interventions among adults: outcomes and implications for future programs
med-2184	resistant to the recession: low-income adults’ maintenance of cooking and away-from-home eating behaviors during times of economic turbulence
med-2185	microstructure and in vitro beta carotene bioaccessibility of heat processed orange fleshed sweet potato. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2186	diet and gallbladder cancer: a case-control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2187	new metrics of affordable nutrition: which vegetables provide most nutrients for least cost? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2188	stability of carotenoids, total phenolics and in vitro antioxidant capacity in the thermal processing of orange-fleshed sweet potato (ipomoea batat... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2189	anticancer effects of sweet potato protein on human colorectal cancer cells
med-2190	sweet potato: a review of its past, present, and future role in human nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2191	effects of baking and boiling on the nutritional and antioxidant properties of sweet potato [ipomoea batatas (l.) lam.] cultivars. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2192	the effect of a sweet potato, footbath, and acupressure intervention in preventing constipation in hospitalized patients with acute coronary syndro... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2193	multiple biological functions of sporamin related to stress tolerance in sweet potato (ipomoea batatas lam). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2194	role of anthocyanin-enriched purple-fleshed sweet potato p40 in colorectal cancer prevention
med-2195	the influence of deep frying using various vegetable oils on acrylamide formation in sweet potato (ipomoea batatas l. lam) chips. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2196	therapeutic efficacy of once-daily oral administration of a kunitz-type protease inhibitor, bikunin, in a mouse model and in human cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2197	growth inhibition and induction of apoptosis in nb4 promyelocytic leukemia cells by trypsin inhibitor from sweet potato storage roots. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2198	relationship between processing method and the glycemic indices of ten sweet potato (ipomoea batatas) cultivars commonly consumed in jamaica
med-2199	sporamin induce apoptosis in human tongue carcinoma cells by down-regulating akt/gsk-3 signaling. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2200	diet and gallbladder cancer: a case-control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2201	new metrics of affordable nutrition: which vegetables provide most nutrients for least cost? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2202	sweet potato: a review of its past, present, and future role in human nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2203	the effect of a sweet potato, footbath, and acupressure intervention in preventing constipation in hospitalized patients with acute coronary syndro... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2204	multiple biological functions of sporamin related to stress tolerance in sweet potato (ipomoea batatas lam). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2205	anticancer effects of sweet potato protein on human colorectal cancer cells
med-2206	consumer acceptance of vegetarian sweet potato products intended for space missions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2207	growth inhibition and induction of apoptosis in nb4 promyelocytic leukemia cells by trypsin inhibitor from sweet potato storage roots. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2208	therapeutic efficacy of once-daily oral administration of a kunitz-type protease inhibitor, bikunin, in a mouse model and in human cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2209	relationship between processing method and the glycemic indices of ten sweet potato (ipomoea batatas) cultivars commonly consumed in jamaica
med-2210	sporamin induce apoptosis in human tongue carcinoma cells by down-regulating akt/gsk-3 signaling. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2211	epidemiology of alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia in china, 1990-2010: a systematic review and analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2212	dietary links to alzheimer's disease: 1999 update. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2213	incidence of dementia and alzheimer disease in 2 communities: yoruba residing in ibadan, nigeria, and african americans residing in indianapolis, i... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2214	global prevalence of dementia: a delphi consensus study
med-2215	the incidence of dementia and intake of animal products: preliminary findings from the adventist health study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2216	trends in diet and alzheimer's disease during the nutrition transition in japan and developing countries. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2217	prevalence of alzheimer's disease and other dementias in rural india: the indo-us study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2218	prevalence of dementia in older japanese-american men in hawaii: the honolulu-asia aging study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2219	no harmful effect of different coca-cola beverages after 6 months of intake on rat testes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2220	position of the academy of nutrition and dietetics: total diet approach to healthy eating. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2221	the perils of ignoring history: big tobacco played dirty and millions died. how similar is big food?
med-2222	effect of cocoa/chocolate ingestion on brachial artery flow-mediated dilation and its relevance to cardiovascular health and disease in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2223	evaluation of antiradical activity of different cocoa and chocolate products: relation with lipid and protein composition
med-2224	dark chocolate improves coronary vasomotion and reduces platelet reactivity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2225	effect of dark chocolate on renal tissue oxygenation as measured by bold-mri in healthy volunteers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2226	effects of sugar-sweetened and sugar-free cocoa on endothelial function in overweight adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2227	chocolate--guilty pleasure or healthy supplement? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2228	effects of chocolate, cocoa, and flavan-3-ols on cardiovascular health: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2229	broccoli sprouts reduce oxidative stress in type 2 diabetes: a randomized double-blind clinical trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2230	creation of a databank for content of antioxidants in food products by an amperometric method. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2231	potential efficacy of broccoli sprouts as a unique supplement for management of type 2 diabetes and its complications. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2232	targeting cancer stem cells with sulforaphane, a dietary component from broccoli and broccoli sprouts. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2233	physiological and biochemical metabolism of germinating broccoli seeds and sprouts. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2234	effect of broccoli sprouts on insulin resistance in type 2 diabetic patients: a randomized double-blind clinical trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2235	bioavailability and inter-conversion of sulforaphane and erucin in human subjects consuming broccoli sprouts or broccoli supplement in a cross-over study design
med-2236	egg consumption and risk of cardiovascular diseases and diabetes: a meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2237	tobacco smoking and chewing, alcohol drinking and lung cancer risk among men in southern india. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2238	sick individuals and sick populations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2239	a novel curcumin-based vaginal cream vacurin selectively eliminates apposed human cervical cancer cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2240	curcumin (diferuloylmethane) delivery methods: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2241	curcumin impairs tumor suppressor p53 function in colon cancer cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2242	curcumin in various cancers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2243	turmeric and curcumin as topical agents in cancer therapy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2244	combination treatment with curcumin and quercetin of adenomas in familial adenomatous polyposis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2245	curcumin impairs tumor suppressor p53 function in colon cancer cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2246	pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic study of oral curcuma extract in patients with colorectal cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2247	carcinogenesis in the gi tract: from morphology to genetics and back again. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2248	trace element status in healthy subjects switching from a mixed to a lactovegetarian diet for 12 mo. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2249	zinc and multi-mineral supplementation should mitigate the pathogenic impact of cadmium exposure. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2250	urinary cadmium in the 1999-2008 u.s. national health and nutrition examination survey (nhanes). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2251	dietary cadmium exposure and risk of postmenopausal breast cancer: a population-based prospective cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2252	diet and nutrients are contributing factors that influence blood cadmium levels. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2253	effects of meals and meal times on uptake of lead from the gastrointestinal tract in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2254	dietary cadmium intake by the belgian adult population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2255	dietary cadmium intake and the risk of cancer: a meta-analysis
med-2256	country-specific correlations across europe between modelled atmospheric cadmium and lead deposition and concentrations in mosses. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2257	associations between cadmium exposure and neurocognitive test scores in a cross-sectional study of us adults
med-2258	environmental cadmium and breast cancer risk
med-2259	cadmium intake and systemic exposure in postmenopausal women and age-matched men who smoke cigarettes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2260	faecal elimination of lead and cadmium in subjects on a mixed and a lactovegetarian diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2261	cadmium in zinc-containing mineral supplements. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2262	assessing human exposure risk to cadmium through inhalation and seafood consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2263	cadmium bioavailability from vegetable and animal-based foods assessed with in vitro digestion/caco-2 cell model. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2264	cadmium blood concentrations in relation to nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2265	physical activity increases the bioavailability of flavanones after dietary aronia-citrus juice intake in triathletes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2266	over-the-counter ibuprofen and risk of gastrointestinal bleeding complications: a systematic literature review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2267	effect of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and prostaglandins on the permeability of the human small intestine.
med-2268	muscle soreness and delayed-onset muscle soreness. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2269	anti-inflammatory activity of natural dietary flavonoids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2270	gastrointestinal safety of nsaids and over-the-counter analgesics. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2271	watermelon juice: potential functional drink for sore muscle relief in athletes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2272	consumption of cherries lowers plasma urate in healthy women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2273	purine-rich foods intake and recurrent gout attacks
med-2274	cherry consumption and the risk of recurrent gout attacks
med-2275	consumption of bing sweet cherries lowers circulating concentrations of inflammation markers in healthy men and women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2276	sweet bing cherries lower circulating concentrations of markers for chronic inflammatory diseases in healthy humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2277	cherries and health: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2278	anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative effects of cherries on freund's adjuvant-induced arthritis in rats. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2279	the role of cyclooxygenase in gastric mucosal protection. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2280	cyclooxygenase inhibitory and antioxidant cyanidin glycosides in cherries and berries. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2281	epidemiology of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug-associated gastrointestinal injury. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2282	mortality with upper gastrointestinal bleeding and perforation: effects of time and nsaid use
med-2283	consumption of bing sweet cherries lowers circulating concentrations of inflammation markers in healthy men and women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2284	cox-2 inhibitors: a story of greed, deception and death. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2285	processed tart cherry products--comparative phytochemical content, in vitro antioxidant capacity and in vitro anti-inflammatory activity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2286	cherries and health: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2287	role of cyclooxygenase isoforms in gastric mucosal defence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2288	current protein intake in america: analysis of the national health and nutrition examination survey, 2003-2004. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2289	americans do not meet federal dietary recommendations
med-2290	nutrient profiles of vegetarian and non vegetarian dietary patterns
med-2291	viscous versus nonviscous soluble fiber supplements: mechanisms and evidence for fiber-specific health benefits. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2292	diverticular disease: eat your fiber! - pubmed - ncbi
med-2293	dietary fiber future directions: integrating new definitions and findings to inform nutrition research and communication
med-2294	comparison of nutritional quality of the vegan, vegetarian, semi-vegetarian, pesco-vegetarian and omnivorous diet
med-2295	trends in dietary fiber intake in the united states, 1999-2008. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2296	vegan lifestyle behaviors: an exploration of congruence with health-related beliefs and assessed health indices. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2297	prescribing exercise as preventive therapy
med-2298	a guide to exercise prescription. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2299	health practices and mortality in japan: combined effects of smoking, drinking, walking and body mass index in the miyagi cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2300	exercise and longevity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2301	comparative effectiveness of exercise and drug interventions on mortality outcomes: metaepidemiological study
med-2302	the state of us health, 1990-2010: burden of diseases, injuries, and risk factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2303	balancing life-style and genomics research for disease prevention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2304	combined impact of health behaviours and mortality in men and women: the epic-norfolk prospective population study
med-2305	healthy living is the best revenge: findings from the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition-potsdam study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2306	healthy lifestyle behaviors and all-cause mortality among adults in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2307	the state of us health, 1990-2010: burden of diseases, injuries, and risk factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2308	spending on vegetable and fruit consumption could reduce all-cause mortality among older adults
med-2309	bridging the gap in life expectancy of the aborigines in taiwan. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2310	fruit and vegetable intake, physical activity, and mortality in older community-dwelling women
med-2311	fruit and vegetable consumption and all-cause mortality: a dose-response analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2312	therapeutic roles of curcumin: lessons learned from clinical trials
med-2313	a randomized controlled trial on the anti-inflammatory effects of curcumin in patients with chronic sulphur mustard-induced cutaneous complications. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2314	curcumin as "curecumin": from kitchen to clinic. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2315	promiscuous drugs compared to selective drugs (promiscuity can be a virtue)
med-2316	curcumin, a component of turmeric: from farm to pharmacy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2317	from exotic spice to modern drug? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2318	therapeutic roles of curcumin: lessons learned from clinical trials
med-2319	curcumin as "curecumin": from kitchen to clinic. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2320	multitargeting by turmeric, the golden spice: from kitchen to clinic. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2321	curcumin in cell death processes: a challenge for cam of age-related pathologies
med-2322	from exotic spice to modern drug? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2323	plant phenolics as drug leads -- what is missing? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2324	the role of hormesis in life extension by dietary restriction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2325	longevity. the allostatic load of dietary restriction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2326	methionine as methyl-group donor in the synthesis of mycobacterium avium envelope lipids, and its inhibition by dl-ethionine, d-norleucine and dl-n... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2327	xenohormesis mechanisms underlying chemopreventive effects of some dietary phytochemicals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2328	treating aging: progress toward dietary restriction mimetics
med-2329	xenohormesis: health benefits from an eon of plant stress response evolution
med-2330	hormesis defined
med-2331	xenohormesis: sensing the chemical cues of other species
med-2332	complexity of the heat stress response in plants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2333	shared signals and the potential for phylogenetic espionage between plants and animals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2334	curcumin in cell death processes: a challenge for cam of age-related pathologies
med-2335	xenohormesis: health benefits from an eon of plant stress response evolution
med-2336	non-specific protein modifications by a phytochemical induce heat shock response for self-defense
med-2337	management of childhood urticaria: current knowledge and practical recommendations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2338	anisakis simplex hypersensitivity is associated with chronic urticaria in endemic areas. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2339	anisakis simplex allergy after eating chicken meat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2340	allergic cross-reactions between cat and pig serum albumin. study at the protein and dna levels. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2341	beef, pork, and milk allergy (cross reactivity with each other and pet allergies). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2342	delayed anaphylaxis to red meat in patients with ige specific for galactose alpha-1,3-galactose (alpha-gal)
med-2343	the relevance of tick bites to the production of ige antibodies to the mammalian oligosaccharide galactose-α-1,3-galactose
med-2344	fish and shellfish allergy in children: review of a persistent food allergy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2345	anisakiasis, an underestimated infection: effect on intestinal permeability of anisakis simplex-sensitized patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2346	anisakis simplex: from obscure infectious worm to inducer of immune hypersensitivity
med-2347	evidence-based evaluation and management of chronic urticaria in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2348	galactose-α-1,3-galactose and delayed anaphylaxis, angioedema, and urticaria in children
med-2349	an update on childhood urticaria and angioedema. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2350	analysis of food-allergic and anaphylactic events in the national electronic injury surveillance system. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2351	specific stimulation of graves' disease thyrocytes by the natural anti-gal antibody from normal and autologous serum. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2352	anaphylaxis to pork kidney is related to ige antibodies specific for galactose-alpha-1,3-galactose. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2353	anti-gal: an abundant human natural antibody of multiple pathogeneses and clinical benefits
med-2354	a unique natural human igg antibody with anti-alpha-galactosyl specificity
med-2355	delayed anaphylaxis to red meat in patients with ige specific for galactose alpha-1,3-galactose (alpha-gal)
med-2356	the relevance of tick bites to the production of ige antibodies to the mammalian oligosaccharide galactose-α-1,3-galactose
med-2357	evidence for a human-specific mechanism for diet and antibody-mediated inflammation in carcinoma progression
med-2358	an outbreak of neurological autoimmunity with polyradiculoneuropathy in workers exposed to aerosolised porcine neural tissue: a descriptive study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2359	anti-gal titers in healthy adults and inflammatory bowel disease patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2360	stari, or masters disease: lone star tick-vectored lyme-like illness. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2361	southern tick-associated rash illness (stari) in the north: stari following a tick bite in long island, new york. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2362	distribution of gal alpha 1----3gal beta 1----4glcnac residues on secreted mammalian glycoproteins (thyroglobulin, fibrinogen, and immunoglobulin g... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2363	a pattern of anti-carbohydrate antibody responses present in patients with advanced atherosclerosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2364	natural human anti-gal alpha(1,3)gal antibodies react with human mucin peptides. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2365	an association between tick bite reactions and red meat allergy in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2366	a possible role for the alpha 1-->3 galactosyl epitope and the natural anti-gal antibody in oncogenesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2367	naturally developing memory t cell xenoreactivity to swine antigens in human peripheral blood lymphocytes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2368	proteomics, metabolomics, and immunomics on microparticles derived from human atherosclerotic plaques. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2369	delayed anaphylaxis, angioedema, or urticaria after consumption of red meat in patients with ige antibodies specific for galactose-α-1,3-galactose
med-2370	thematic review series: the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis: an interpretive history of the cholesterol controversy, part iii: mechanistically defi... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2371	daily egg consumption in hyperlipidemic adults - effects on endothelial function and cardiovascular risk
med-2372	egg consumption and endothelial function: a randomized controlled crossover trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2373	egg yolk consumption and carotid plaque. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2374	egg consumption and risk of cardiovascular diseases and diabetes: a meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2375	egg yolk consumption and carotid plaque. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2376	usefulness of brachial artery flow-mediated dilation to predict long-term cardiovascular events in subjects without heart disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2377	frequency of nut consumption and mortality risk in the predimed nutrition intervention trial
med-2378	effects of diets high in walnuts and flax oil on hemodynamic responses to stress and vascular endothelial function
med-2379	effects of walnuts on endothelial function in overweight adults with visceral obesity: a randomized, controlled, crossover trial
med-2380	nuts, hypertension and endothelial function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2381	a systematic review of the effects of nuts on blood lipid profiles in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2382	us prevalence of self-reported peanut, tree nut, and sesame allergy: 11-year follow-up. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2383	the role of nuts in the optimal diet: time for a critical appraisal? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2384	hazelnut-enriched diet improves cardiovascular risk biomarkers beyond a lipid-lowering effect in hypercholesterolemic subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2385	concentration of mercury in hair of diseased people in japan. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2386	methylmercury exposure and incident diabetes in u.s. men and women in two prospective cohorts
med-2387	a strong dose-response relation between serum concentrations of persistent organic pollutants and diabetes: results from the national health and ex... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2388	simultaneous exposure of non-diabetics to high levels of dioxins and mercury increases their risk of insulin resistance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2389	persistent organic pollutants and type 2 diabetes: a prospective analysis in the nurses’ health study and meta-analysis
med-2390	the role of persistent organic pollutants in the worldwide epidemic of type 2 diabetes mellitus and the possible connection to farmed atlantic salm... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2391	perfluorinated compounds, polychlorinated biphenyls, and organochlorine pesticide contamination in composite food samples from dallas, texas, usa
med-2392	public health concern behind the exposure to persistent organic pollutants and the risk of metabolic diseases
med-2393	environmental contaminants as risk factors for developing diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2394	molecular epidemiologic evidence for diabetogenic effects of dioxin exposure in u.s. air force veterans of the vietnam war
med-2395	a strong dose-response relation between serum concentrations of persistent organic pollutants and diabetes: results from the national health and ex... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2396	the role of persistent organic pollutants in the worldwide epidemic of type 2 diabetes mellitus and the possible connection to farmed atlantic salm... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2397	organochlorine exposure and incidence of diabetes in a cohort of great lakes sport fish consumers
med-2398	role of dietary n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in type 2 diabetes: a review of epidemiological and clinical studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2399	public health concern behind the exposure to persistent organic pollutants and the risk of metabolic diseases
med-2400	short- and long-term morbidity and mortality in the population exposed to dioxin after the "seveso accident". - pubmed - ncbi
med-2401	fish consumption, dietary long-chain n-3 fatty acids, and risk of type 2 diabetes
med-2402	fish intake and risks of total and cause-specific mortality in 2 population-based cohort studies of 134,296 men and women
med-2403	omega-3 fatty acids and incident type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
med-2404	increased rate of hospitalization for diabetes and residential proximity of hazardous waste sites
med-2405	environmental contaminants as risk factors for developing diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2406	fish and marine omega-3 polyunsatured fatty acid consumption and incidence of type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
med-2407	public health concern behind the exposure to persistent organic pollutants and the risk of metabolic diseases
med-2408	fish consumption, dietary long-chain n-3 fatty acids, and risk of type 2 diabetes
med-2409	marine n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids are inversely associated with risk of type 2 diabetes in asians: a systematic review and meta-analysis
med-2410	fish consumption, insulin sensitivity and beta-cell function in the insulin resistance atherosclerosis study (iras)
med-2411	omega-3 fatty acids and incident type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
med-2412	fish oil supplementation in type 2 diabetes: a quantitative systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2413	association of fish and n-3 fatty acid intake with the risk of type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis of prospective studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2414	review of epidemiologic studies of dietary acrylamide intake and the risk of cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2415	intake of fried meat and risk of cancer: a follow-up study in finland. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2416	chronic intake of potato chips in humans increases the production of reactive oxygen radicals by leukocytes and increases plasma c-reactive protein... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2417	empirically derived dietary patterns and risk of postmenopausal breast cancer in a large prospective cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2418	consumption of deep-fried foods and risk of prostate cancera,b
med-2419	dietary acrylamide exposure of the french population: results of the second french total diet study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2420	acrylamide in foods: a review of the science and future considerations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2421	birth weight, head circumference, and prenatal exposure to acrylamide from maternal diet: the european prospective mother–child study (newgeneris)
med-2422	a statistical regression model for the estimation of acrylamide concentrations in french fries for excess lifetime cancer risk assessment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2423	dietary patterns and breast cancer risk among women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2424	preschool diet and adult risk of breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2425	heterocyclic amines: mutagens/carcinogens produced during cooking of meat and fish. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2426	pre-diagnostic acrylamide exposure and survival after breast cancer among postmenopausal danish women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2427	elevated levels of cholesterol-rich lipid rafts in cancer cells are correlated with apoptosis sensitivity induced by cholesterol-depleting agents
med-2428	women and statin use: a women's health advocacy perspective. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2429	statin use and risk of breast cancer: a meta-analysis of observational studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2430	beta-sitosterol enhances tamoxifen effectiveness on breast cancer cells by affecting ceramide metabolism. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2431	long-term statin use and risk of ductal and lobular breast cancer among women 55-74 years of age
med-2432	the garden of eden--plant based diets, the genetic drive to conserve cholesterol and its implications for heart disease in the 21st century. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2433	total cholesterol and cancer risk in a large prospective study in korea
med-2434	high acat1 expression in estrogen receptor negative basal-like breast cancer cells is associated with ldl-induced proliferation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2435	chemoprevention of breast cancer by dietary compounds. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2436	content of low density lipoprotein receptors in breast cancer tissue related to survival of patients.
med-2437	diet and breast cancer: understanding risks and benefits. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2438	the association between dietary lignans, phytoestrogen-rich foods, and fiber intake and postmenopausal breast cancer risk: a german case-control st... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2439	plant sterols as anticancer nutrients: evidence for their role in breast cancer
med-2440	total cholesterol and cancer risk in a large prospective study in korea
med-2441	vegetarian diet ameliorates symptoms of atopic dermatitis through reduction of the number of peripheral eosinophils and of pge2 synthesis by monocy... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2442	double-blind, controlled, crossover study of cyclosporin in adults with severe refractory atopic dermatitis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2443	vegan regimen with reduced medication in the treatment of bronchial asthma. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2444	side-effect profile of cyclosporin a in patients treated for psoriasis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2445	dietary polyphenols in the prevention and treatment of allergic diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2446	dietary antioxidant intake, allergic sensitization and allergic diseases in young children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2447	manipulating antioxidant intake in asthma: a randomized controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2448	clinical efficacy of apple polyphenol for treating cedar pollinosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2449	an evaluation of the clinical efficacy of tomato extract for perennial allergic rhinitis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2450	protective effect of fruits, vegetables and the mediterranean diet on asthma and allergies among children in crete
med-2451	diet, lung function, and lung function decline in a cohort of 2512 middle aged men
med-2452	a prospective study of diet and adult-onset asthma. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2453	effect of fresh fruit consumption on lung function and wheeze in children
med-2454	vegan regimen with reduced medication in the treatment of bronchial asthma. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2455	bronchial reactivity and dietary antioxidants
med-2456	diet and asthma, allergic rhinoconjunctivitis and atopic eczema symptom prevalence: an ecological analysis of the international study of asthma and... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2457	lycopene-rich treatments modify noneosinophilic airway inflammation in asthma: proof of concept. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2458	manipulating antioxidant intake in asthma: a randomized controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2459	effect of dietary patterns on measures of lipid peroxidation: results from a randomized clinical trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2460	airway and circulating levels of carotenoids in asthma and healthy controls. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2461	the association of diet with respiratory symptoms and asthma in schoolchildren in taipei, taiwan. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2462	maternal meat and fat consumption during pregnancy and suspected atopic eczema in japanese infants aged 3-4 months: the osaka maternal and child he... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2463	endocrine-disrupting chemicals: associated disorders and mechanisms of action
med-2464	low vegetable intake is associated with allergic asthma and moderate-to-severe airway hyperresponsiveness. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2465	reduction in penis size and plasma testosterone concentrations in juvenile alligators living in a contaminated environment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2466	p-nonyl-phenol: an estrogenic xenobiotic released from "modified" polystyrene.
med-2467	do fast foods cause asthma, rhinoconjunctivitis and eczema? global findings from the international study of asthma and allergies in childhood (isaa... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2468	prevalence and risk factors for self-reported asthma in an adult indian population: a cross-sectional survey
med-2469	an anthroposophic lifestyle and intestinal microflora in infancy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2470	dietary meat and fat intake and prevalence of rhinoconjunctivitis in pregnant japanese women: baseline data from the kyushu okinawa maternal and child health study
med-2471	which population level environmental factors are associated with asthma, rhinoconjunctivitis and eczema? review of the ecological analyses of isaac phase one
med-2472	vegan regimen with reduced medication in the treatment of bronchial asthma. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2473	xeno-estrogenic compounds in precipitation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2474	the international study of asthma and allergies in childhood (isaac) phase three: a global synthesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2475	the effects of exclusion of dietary egg and milk in the management of asthmatic children: a pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2476	diet, infection and wheezy illness: lessons from adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2477	association of dietary soy genistein intake with lung function and asthma control: a post-hoc analysis of patients enrolled in a prospective multicentre clinical trial
med-2478	effects of intestinal microflora and the environment on the development of asthma and allergy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2479	the intestinal microflora in allergic estonian and swedish 2-year-old children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2480	increasing prevalence of japanese cedar pollinosis: a meta-regression analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2481	alkylphenols--potential modulators of the allergic response. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2482	randomized placebo-controlled trial of lactobacillus on asthmatic children with allergic rhinitis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2483	european bans on surfactant trigger transatlantic debate. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2484	the burden of childhood asthma
med-2485	alkylphenols and alkylphenol ethoxylates contamination of crustaceans and fishes from the adriatic sea (italy). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2486	effects of xenoestrogenic environmental pollutants on the proliferation of a human breast cancer cell line (mcf-7). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2487	novel probiotic candidates for humans isolated from raw fruits and vegetables. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2488	food prices and blood cholesterol. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2489	agricultural policies, food and public health
med-2490	arsenic, organic foods, and brown rice syrup
med-2491	arsenic and lead in juice: apple, citrus, and apple-base. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2492	roxarsone, inorganic arsenic, and other arsenic species in chicken: a u.s.-based market basket sample
med-2493	environmental toxicants and the developing immune system: a missing link in the global battle against infectious disease?
med-2494	cancer and non-cancer health effects from food contaminant exposures for children and adults in california: a risk assessment
med-2495	prenatal exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls and dioxins from the maternal diet may be associated with immunosuppressive effects that persist int... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2496	fish intake and breastfeeding time are associated with serum concentrations of organochlorines in a swedish population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2497	prenatal exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls and dioxins is associated with increased risk of wheeze and infections in infants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2498	dietary restriction, growth factors and aging: from yeast to humans
med-2499	mtor is a key modulator of ageing and age-related disease
med-2500	caloric restriction in humans: potential pitfalls and health concerns. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2501	amino acid sensing and regulation of mtorc1. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2502	macronutrient balance and lifespan
med-2503	insights into the beneficial effect of caloric/ dietary restriction for a healthy and prolonged life
med-2504	nutrient control of torc1, a cell-cycle regulator. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2505	ten years of life: is it a matter of choice? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2506	caloric restriction, the traditional okinawan diet, and healthy aging: the diet of the world's longest-lived people and its potential impact on mor... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2507	mtorc1 activity as a determinant of cancer risk--rationalizing the cancer-preventive effects of adiponectin, metformin, rapamycin, and low-protein ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2508	leucine signaling in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes and obesity
med-2509	amino acid sensing in dietary-restriction-mediated longevity: roles of signal-transducing kinases gcn2 and tor
med-2510	comparative and meta-analytic insights into life extension via dietary restriction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2511	the okinawan diet: health implications of a low-calorie, nutrient-dense, antioxidant-rich dietary pattern low in glycemic load. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2512	extending healthy ageing: nutrient sensitive pathway and centenarian population
med-2513	insights into the beneficial effect of caloric/ dietary restriction for a healthy and prolonged life
med-2514	why human lifespan is rapidly increasing: solving "longevity riddle" with "revealed-slow-aging" hypothesis
med-2515	mtor: from growth signal integration to cancer, diabetes and ageing
med-2516	long-term low-calorie low-protein vegan diet and endurance exercise are associated with low cardiometabolic risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2517	mtor is a key modulator of ageing and age-related disease
med-2518	aging is not programmed
med-2519	caloric restriction in humans: potential pitfalls and health concerns. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2520	tor-driven aging: speeding car without brakes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2521	rapamycin (ay-22,989), a new antifungal antibiotic. i. taxonomy of the producing streptomycete and isolation of the active principle. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2522	blood type diets lack supporting evidence: a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2523	abo genotype, ‘blood-type’ diet and cardiometabolic risk factors
med-2524	medical nutrition therapy for hypercholesterolemia positively affects patient satisfaction and quality of life outcomes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2525	a global survey of physicians' perceptions on cholesterol management: the from the heart study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2526	diet, lifestyle, and the etiology of coronary artery disease: the cornell china study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2527	cross-analysis of dietary prescriptions and adherence in 356 hypercholesterolaemic patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2528	improvements in hostility and depression in relation to dietary change and cholesterol lowering. the family heart study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2529	effect of a very-high-fiber vegetable, fruit, and nut diet on serum lipids and colonic function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2530	the new pathophysiology of coronary artery disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2531	ip6: a novel anti-cancer agent. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2532	phytate in foods and significance for humans: food sources, intake, processing, bioavailability, protective role and analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2533	in vitro investigations of the potential health benefits of australian-grown faba beans (vicia faba l.): chemopreventative capacity and inhibitory ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2534	efficacy of ip6 + inositol in the treatment of breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy: prospective, randomized, pilot clinical study
med-2535	traditional non-western diets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2536	anti-angiogenic activity of inositol hexaphosphate (ip6). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2537	protection against cancer by dietary ip6 and inositol. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2538	the effect of inositol hexaphosphate on the expression of selected metalloproteinases and their tissue inhibitors in il-1β-stimulated colon cancer cells
med-2539	the role of phytic acid in legumes: antinutrient or beneficial function? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2540	diet and colorectal cancer: a case-control study in greece. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2541	dietary suppression of colonic cancer. fiber or phytate? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2542	prostate cancer and inositol hexaphosphate: efficacy and mechanisms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2543	high dry bean intake and reduced risk of advanced colorectal adenoma recurrence among participants in the polyp prevention trial
med-2544	suppression of colonic cancer by dietary phytic acid. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2545	colorectal cancer and diet in an asian population--a case-control study among singapore chinese. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2546	inositol hexaphosphate (ip6) inhibits key events of cancer metastasis: ii. effects on integrins and focal adhesions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2547	effect of inositol hexaphosphate (ip(6)) on human normal and leukaemic haematopoietic cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2548	dietary risk factors for colon cancer in a low-risk population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2549	cancer inhibition by inositol hexaphosphate (ip6) and inositol: from laboratory to clinic. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2550	ip6: a novel anti-cancer agent. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2551	phytate in foods and significance for humans: food sources, intake, processing, bioavailability, protective role and analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2552	in vitro investigations of the potential health benefits of australian-grown faba beans (vicia faba l.): chemopreventative capacity and inhibitory ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2553	efficacy of ip6 + inositol in the treatment of breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy: prospective, randomized, pilot clinical study
med-2554	traditional non-western diets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2555	anti-angiogenic activity of inositol hexaphosphate (ip6). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2556	protection against cancer by dietary ip6 and inositol. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2557	the effect of inositol hexaphosphate on the expression of selected metalloproteinases and their tissue inhibitors in il-1β-stimulated colon cancer cells
med-2558	the role of phytic acid in legumes: antinutrient or beneficial function? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2559	effect of ip6 on human neutrophil cytokine production and cell morphology. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2560	diet and colorectal cancer: a case-control study in greece. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2561	dietary suppression of colonic cancer. fiber or phytate? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2562	prostate cancer and inositol hexaphosphate: efficacy and mechanisms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2563	high dry bean intake and reduced risk of advanced colorectal adenoma recurrence among participants in the polyp prevention trial
med-2564	colorectal cancer and diet in an asian population--a case-control study among singapore chinese. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2565	effect of inositol hexaphosphate (ip(6)) on human normal and leukaemic haematopoietic cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2566	dietary risk factors for colon cancer in a low-risk population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2567	cancer inhibition by inositol hexaphosphate (ip6) and inositol: from laboratory to clinic. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2568	ip6: a novel anti-cancer agent. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2569	phytate in foods and significance for humans: food sources, intake, processing, bioavailability, protective role and analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2570	in vitro investigations of the potential health benefits of australian-grown faba beans (vicia faba l.): chemopreventative capacity and inhibitory ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2571	efficacy of ip6 + inositol in the treatment of breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy: prospective, randomized, pilot clinical study
med-2572	traditional non-western diets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2573	anti-angiogenic activity of inositol hexaphosphate (ip6). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2574	protection against cancer by dietary ip6 and inositol. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2575	the effect of inositol hexaphosphate on the expression of selected metalloproteinases and their tissue inhibitors in il-1β-stimulated colon cancer cells
med-2576	the role of phytic acid in legumes: antinutrient or beneficial function? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2577	diet and colorectal cancer: a case-control study in greece. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2578	dietary suppression of colonic cancer. fiber or phytate? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2579	prostate cancer and inositol hexaphosphate: efficacy and mechanisms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2580	high dry bean intake and reduced risk of advanced colorectal adenoma recurrence among participants in the polyp prevention trial
med-2581	colorectal cancer and diet in an asian population--a case-control study among singapore chinese. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2582	nonstarch polysaccharide consumption in four scandinavian populations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2583	effect of inositol hexaphosphate (ip(6)) on human normal and leukaemic haematopoietic cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2584	dietary risk factors for colon cancer in a low-risk population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2585	cancer inhibition by inositol hexaphosphate (ip6) and inositol: from laboratory to clinic. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2586	systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials of the effects of low carbohydrate diets on cardiovascular risk factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2587	the effect of high-protein diets on coronary blood flow. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2588	low-carbohydrate diets and all-cause mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies
med-2589	treating hyperlipidemia in the elderly. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2590	reversing heart disease in the new millennium--the fleming unified theory. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2591	negative effect of a low-carbohydrate, high-protein, high-fat diet on small peripheral artery reactivity in patients with increased cardiovascular ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2592	effects of pistachios on body weight in chinese subjects with metabolic syndrome
med-2593	frequency of nut consumption and mortality risk in the predimed nutrition intervention trial
med-2594	nut intake and adiposity: meta-analysis of clinical trials. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2595	health benefits of nut consumption with special reference to body weight control. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2596	association of nut consumption with total and cause-specific mortality
med-2597	should we go nuts about nuts?
med-2598	apoptosis induced by death receptors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2599	curcumin sensitizes tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (trail)-induced apoptosis through reactive oxygen species-mediated upre... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2600	new perspectives of curcumin in cancer prevention
med-2601	curcumin induces apoptosis in human non-small cell lung cancer nci-h460 cells through er stress and caspase cascade- and mitochondria-dependent pat... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2602	curcumin induces apoptosis in human melanoma cells through a fas receptor/caspase-8 pathway independent of p53. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2603	fadd: a regulator of life and death. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2604	curcumin and cancer cells: how many ways can curry kill tumor cells selectively?
med-2605	curcumin-induced apoptosis of human colon cancer colo 205 cells through the production of ros, ca2+ and the activation of caspase-3. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2606	effect of turmeric on urinary mutagens in smokers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2607	new perspectives of curcumin in cancer prevention
med-2608	in vitro antimutagenicity of curcumin against environmental mutagens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2609	molecular mechanisms of curcumin action: gene expression. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2610	plant-derived health: the effects of turmeric and curcuminoids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2611	turmeric (curcuma longa) inhibits inflammatory nuclear factor (nf)-κb and nf-κb-regulated gene products and induces death receptors leading to suppressed proliferation, induced chemosensitization, and suppressed osteoclastogenesis
med-2612	curcumin and cancer: an "old-age" disease with an "age-old" solution. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2613	curcumin, a component of turmeric: from farm to pharmacy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2614	dietary turmeric potentially reduces the risk of cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2615	plant-derived health: the effects of turmeric and curcuminoids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2616	the significance of azo-reduction in the mutagenesis and carcinogenesis of azo dyes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2617	teratological evaluation of fd&c red no. 2 -a collaborative government-industry study. ii. fda's study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2618	toxicology of food dyes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2619	genotoxic and mutagenic effects of erythrosine b, a xanthene food dye, on hepg2 cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2620	maternal meat and fat consumption during pregnancy and suspected atopic eczema in japanese infants aged 3-4 months: the osaka maternal and child he... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2621	endocrine-disrupting chemicals: associated disorders and mechanisms of action
med-2622	p-nonyl-phenol: an estrogenic xenobiotic released from "modified" polystyrene.
med-2623	reduction in penis size and plasma testosterone concentrations in juvenile alligators living in a contaminated environment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2624	do fast foods cause asthma, rhinoconjunctivitis and eczema? global findings from the international study of asthma and allergies in childhood (isaa... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2625	dietary exposure to xenoestrogens in new zealand. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2626	comparison of short-term estrogenicity tests for identification of hormone-disrupting chemicals
med-2627	human exposure to endocrine disrupters: carcinogenic risk assessment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2628	dietary meat and fat intake and prevalence of rhinoconjunctivitis in pregnant japanese women: baseline data from the kyushu okinawa maternal and child health study
med-2629	inadvertent exposure to xenoestrogens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2630	alkylphenols in human milk and their relations to dietary habits in central taiwan. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2631	xeno-estrogenic compounds in precipitation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2632	nonylphenol and octylphenol in human breast milk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2633	endocrine disrupting nonylphenols are ubiquitous in food. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2634	association of dietary soy genistein intake with lung function and asthma control: a post-hoc analysis of patients enrolled in a prospective multicentre clinical trial
med-2635	effects of intestinal microflora and the environment on the development of asthma and allergy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2636	increasing prevalence of japanese cedar pollinosis: a meta-regression analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2637	alkylphenols--potential modulators of the allergic response. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2638	european bans on surfactant trigger transatlantic debate. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2639	trends in nutritional intake and serum cholesterol levels over 40 years in tanushimaru, japanese men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2640	alkylphenols and alkylphenol ethoxylates contamination of crustaceans and fishes from the adriatic sea (italy). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2641	effects of xenoestrogenic environmental pollutants on the proliferation of a human breast cancer cell line (mcf-7). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2642	maternal meat and fat consumption during pregnancy and suspected atopic eczema in japanese infants aged 3-4 months: the osaka maternal and child he... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2643	endocrine-disrupting chemicals: associated disorders and mechanisms of action
med-2644	p-nonyl-phenol: an estrogenic xenobiotic released from "modified" polystyrene.
med-2645	reduction in penis size and plasma testosterone concentrations in juvenile alligators living in a contaminated environment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2646	do fast foods cause asthma, rhinoconjunctivitis and eczema? global findings from the international study of asthma and allergies in childhood (isaa... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2647	dietary exposure to xenoestrogens in new zealand. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2648	comparison of short-term estrogenicity tests for identification of hormone-disrupting chemicals
med-2649	dietary meat and fat intake and prevalence of rhinoconjunctivitis in pregnant japanese women: baseline data from the kyushu okinawa maternal and child health study
med-2650	inadvertent exposure to xenoestrogens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2651	alkylphenols in human milk and their relations to dietary habits in central taiwan. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2652	xeno-estrogenic compounds in precipitation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2653	nonylphenol and octylphenol in human breast milk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2654	endocrine disrupting nonylphenols are ubiquitous in food. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2655	association of dietary soy genistein intake with lung function and asthma control: a post-hoc analysis of patients enrolled in a prospective multicentre clinical trial
med-2656	effects of intestinal microflora and the environment on the development of asthma and allergy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2657	increasing prevalence of japanese cedar pollinosis: a meta-regression analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2658	alkylphenols--potential modulators of the allergic response. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2659	european bans on surfactant trigger transatlantic debate. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2660	trends in nutritional intake and serum cholesterol levels over 40 years in tanushimaru, japanese men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2661	alkylphenols and alkylphenol ethoxylates contamination of crustaceans and fishes from the adriatic sea (italy). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2662	effects of xenoestrogenic environmental pollutants on the proliferation of a human breast cancer cell line (mcf-7). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2663	a berry thought-provoking idea: the potential role of plant polyphenols in the treatment of age-related cognitive disorders. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2664	plant foods and brain aging: a critical appraisal. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2665	dietary intake of berries and flavonoids in relation to cognitive decline
med-2666	blueberry supplementation improves memory in older adults
med-2667	reversals of age-related declines in neuronal signal transduction, cognitive, and motor behavioral deficits with blueberry, spinach, or strawberry ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2668	concord grape juice supplementation and neurocognitive function in human aging. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2669	concord grape juice supplementation improves memory function in older adults with mild cognitive impairment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2670	blueberries and neuronal aging. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2671	microbiology of fresh and restructured lamb meat: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2672	effects of added connective tissues on the sensory and mechanical properties of restructured beef steaks. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2673	determination of microbial transglutaminase in meat and meat products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2674	p53: guardian of the genome and policeman of the oncogenes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2675	comparison of the cytotoxic and mutagenic potential of liquid smoke food flavourings, cigarette smoke condensate and wood smoke condensate. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2676	mutagenicity testing in the salmonella typhimurium assay of phenolic compounds and phenolic fractions obtained from smokehouse smoke condensates. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2677	biological clues to potent dna-damaging activities in food and flavoring
med-2678	polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in smoked food products and commercial liquid smoke flavourings. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2679	commercial hickory-smoke flavouring is a human lymphoblast mutagen but does not induce lung adenomas in newborn mice. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2680	food-frequency questionnaire based estimates of total antioxidant capacity and risk of non-hodgkin lymphoma
med-2681	pathological aspects of lipid peroxidation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2682	total antioxidant capacity from diet and risk of myocardial infarction: a prospective cohort of women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2683	dietary total antioxidant capacity and gastric cancer risk in the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2684	impaired endothelial function following a meal rich in used cooking fat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2685	total antioxidant capacity of diet and risk of stroke: a population-based prospective cohort of women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2686	the free radical theory of aging revisited: the cell signaling disruption theory of aging
med-2687	the effect of blood removal on oxidation and shelf life of broiler breast meat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2688	role of antioxidants in cancer therapy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2689	antioxidant supplements for prevention of gastrointestinal cancers: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2690	atherosclerosis and oxidant stress: the end of the road for antioxidant vitamin treatment? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2691	oxidative processes in meat and meat products: quality implications. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2692	the stomach as a bioreactor: dietary lipid peroxidation in the gastric fluid and the effects of plant-derived antioxidants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2693	food-frequency questionnaire based estimates of total antioxidant capacity and risk of non-hodgkin lymphoma
med-2694	pathological aspects of lipid peroxidation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2695	total antioxidant capacity from diet and risk of myocardial infarction: a prospective cohort of women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2696	dietary total antioxidant capacity and gastric cancer risk in the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2697	impaired endothelial function following a meal rich in used cooking fat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2698	total antioxidant capacity of diet and risk of stroke: a population-based prospective cohort of women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2699	the free radical theory of aging revisited: the cell signaling disruption theory of aging
med-2700	the effect of blood removal on oxidation and shelf life of broiler breast meat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2701	role of antioxidants in cancer therapy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2702	antioxidant supplements for prevention of gastrointestinal cancers: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2703	atherosclerosis and oxidant stress: the end of the road for antioxidant vitamin treatment? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2704	oxidative processes in meat and meat products: quality implications. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2705	the stomach as a bioreactor: dietary lipid peroxidation in the gastric fluid and the effects of plant-derived antioxidants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2706	adverse effects of aromatherapy: a systematic review of case reports and case series. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2707	ambient odor of orange in a dental office reduces anxiety and improves mood in female patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2708	inhalation aromatherapy during radiotherapy: results of a placebo-controlled double-blind randomized trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2709	cardiac tamponade caused by acupuncture: a review of the literature. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2710	aromatherapy facts and fictions: a scientific analysis of olfactory effects on mood, physiology and behavior. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2711	accidental bullous phototoxic reactions to bergamot aromatherapy oil. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2712	a systematic review on the anxiolytic effects of aromatherapy in people with anxiety symptoms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2713	effect of sweet orange aroma on experimental anxiety in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2714	aromatherapy: a systematic review.
med-2715	physical activity energy expenditure has not declined since the 1980s and matches energy expenditures of wild mammals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2716	myths, presumptions, and facts about obesity
med-2717	the role of exercise in the treatment of obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2718	energy balance and obesity
med-2719	why do individuals not lose more weight from an exercise intervention at a defined dose? an energy balance analysis
med-2720	potential effect of physical activity based menu labels on the calorie content of selected fast food meals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2721	increased food energy supply is more than sufficient to explain the us epidemic of obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2722	prevalence of physical activity and obesity in us counties, 2001–2011: a road map for action
med-2723	health and economic burden of the projected obesity trends in the usa and the uk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2724	heart rate, rate-pressure product, and oxygen uptake during four sexual activities. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2725	conflicts of interest in approvals of additives to food determined to be generally recognized as safe: out of balance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2726	profits and pandemics: prevention of harmful effects of tobacco, alcohol, and ultra-processed food and drink industries. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2727	characterization of campylobacter spp. transferred from naturally contaminated chicken legs to cooked chicken slices via a cutting board. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2728	annual cost of illness and quality-adjusted life year losses in the united states due to 14 foodborne pathogens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2729	trends in u.s. consumers' safe handling and consumption of food and their risk perceptions, 1988 through 2010. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2730	reduction of faecal coliform, coliform and heterotrophic plate count bacteria in the household kitchen and bathroom by disinfection with hypochlori... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2731	foodnet estimate of the burden of illness caused by nontyphoidal salmonella infections in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2732	overcrowding stress decreases macrophage activity and increases salmonella enteritidis invasion in broiler chickens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2733	consumer knowledge of foodborne microbial hazards and food-handling practices. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2734	homicide rates among persons aged 10-24 years - united states, 1981-2010. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2735	initial contamination of chicken parts with salmonella at retail and cross-contamination of cooked chicken with salmonella from raw chicken during ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2736	characterization of campylobacter spp. transferred from naturally contaminated chicken legs to cooked chicken slices via a cutting board. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2737	annual cost of illness and quality-adjusted life year losses in the united states due to 14 foodborne pathogens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2738	trends in u.s. consumers' safe handling and consumption of food and their risk perceptions, 1988 through 2010. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2739	reduction of faecal coliform, coliform and heterotrophic plate count bacteria in the household kitchen and bathroom by disinfection with hypochlori... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2740	foodnet estimate of the burden of illness caused by nontyphoidal salmonella infections in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2741	overcrowding stress decreases macrophage activity and increases salmonella enteritidis invasion in broiler chickens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2742	consumer knowledge of foodborne microbial hazards and food-handling practices. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2743	outbreak of salmonella heidelberg infections linked to a single poultry producer -- 13 states, 2012-2013. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2744	homicide rates among persons aged 10-24 years - united states, 1981-2010. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2745	initial contamination of chicken parts with salmonella at retail and cross-contamination of cooked chicken with salmonella from raw chicken during ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2746	campylobacter transfer from naturally contaminated chicken thighs to cutting boards is inversely related to initial load. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2747	attribution of foodborne illnesses, hospitalizations, and deaths to food commodities by using outbreak data, united states, 1998–2008
med-2748	persistence of human norovirus in reconstituted pesticides--pesticide application as a possible source of viruses in fresh produce chains. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2749	epidemiology of foodborne norovirus outbreaks, united states, 2001–2008
med-2750	lack of benefit of dietary advice to men with angina: results of a controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2751	global fishmeal and fish-oil supply: inputs, outputs and markets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2752	association between omega-3 fatty acid supplementation and risk of major cardiovascular disease events: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2753	secondary prevention of chd in uk men: the diet and reinfarction trial and its sequel. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2754	efficacy of omega-3 fatty acid supplements (eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid) in the secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease: ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2755	effects of changes in fat, fish, and fibre intakes on death and myocardial reinfarction: diet and reinfarction trial (dart). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2756	fish consumption, omega-3 fatty acids, and environmental contaminants in relation to low-grade inflammation and early atherosclerosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2757	multivitamin-multimineral supplementation and mortality: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2758	multivitamins in the prevention of cardiovascular disease in men: the physicians' health study ii randomized controlled trial
med-2759	vomiting from multivitamins: a potential drug interaction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2760	multivitamins in the prevention of cancer in men: the physicians’ health study ii randomized controlled trial
med-2761	who uses multivitamins? a cross-sectional study in the physicians' health study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2762	vitamin and mineral supplements in the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease and cancer: an updated systematic evidence review for the u.s. ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2763	facing the facelessness of public health: what's the public got to do with it? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2764	red meat consumption and cancer: reasons to suspect involvement of bovine infectious factors in colorectal cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2765	the value of current nutrition information. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2766	the etiological significance of related diseases
med-2767	towards a new system of health: the challenge of western disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2768	western diseases and their emergence related to diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2769	milk intake in early life and risk of advanced prostate cancer
med-2770	the experience of japan as a clue to the etiology of breast and ovarian cancers: relationship between death from both malignancies and dietary prac... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2771	milk consumption is a risk factor for prostate cancer in western countries: evidence from cohort studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2772	milk consumption is a risk factor for prostate cancer: meta-analysis of case-control studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2773	the experience of japan as a clue to the etiology of testicular and prostatic cancers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2774	milk stimulates growth of prostate cancer cells in culture. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2775	incidence and mortality of testicular and prostatic cancers in relation to world dietary practices. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2776	curcumin as "curecumin": from kitchen to clinic. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2777	the association between gout and nephrolithiasis: the national health and nutrition examination survey iii, 1988-1994. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2778	curcumin, a component of turmeric: from farm to pharmacy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2779	plant-derived health: the effects of turmeric and curcuminoids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2780	total and soluble oxalate content of some indian spices. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2781	effect of different curcumin dosages on human gall bladder. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2782	curcumin maintenance therapy for ulcerative colitis: randomized, multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2783	multitargeting by turmeric, the golden spice: from kitchen to clinic. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2784	curcumin: the story so far. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2785	mitochondrial and nuclear dna damage induced by curcumin in human hepatoma g2 cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2786	therapeutic potential of turmeric in alzheimer's disease: curcumin or curcuminoids? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2787	the effect of curcumin and placebo on human gall-bladder function: an ultrasound study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2788	clinical utility of curcumin extract. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2789	curcumin: a new paradigm and therapeutic opportunity for the treatment of osteoarthritis: curcumin for osteoarthritis management
med-2790	a clinical review of different formulations of vasa (adhatoda vasica) on tamaka shwasa (asthma)
med-2791	bioavailability of curcumin: problems and promises. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2792	cholesterol oxides in indian ghee: possible cause of unexplained high risk of atherosclerosis in indian immigrant populations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2793	biochemical basis of enhanced drug bioavailability by piperine: evidence that piperine is a potent inhibitor of drug metabolism. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2794	dietary turmeric potentially reduces the risk of cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2795	influence of piperine on the pharmacokinetics of curcumin in animals and human volunteers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2796	curcumin-free turmeric exhibits anti-inflammatory and anticancer activities: identification of novel components of turmeric. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2797	osteoarthritis as an inflammatory disease (osteoarthritis is not osteoarthrosis!). - pubmed - ncbi
med-2798	therapeutic roles of curcumin: lessons learned from clinical trials
med-2799	synovial tissue inflammation in early and late osteoarthritis
med-2800	curcumin: a new paradigm and therapeutic opportunity for the treatment of osteoarthritis: curcumin for osteoarthritis management
med-2801	curcumin and obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2802	efficacy and safety of curcuma domestica extracts in patients with knee osteoarthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2803	dietary polyphenols and mechanisms of osteoarthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2804	epidemiology of oa
med-2805	pathobiology of obesity and osteoarthritis: integrating biomechanics and inflammation
med-2806	biological actions of curcumin on articular chondrocytes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2807	efficacy and safety of meriva®, a curcumin-phosphatidylcholine complex, during extended administration in osteoarthritis patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2808	death by design: where curcumin sensitizes drug-resistant tumours. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2809	therapeutic roles of curcumin: lessons learned from clinical trials
med-2810	curcumin as "curecumin": from kitchen to clinic. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2811	curcumin, an active component of turmeric in the prevention and treatment of ulcerative colitis: preclinical and clinical observations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2812	molecular mechanisms of curcumin action: gene expression. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2813	curcumin: getting back to the roots. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2814	curcumin in various cancers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2815	curcumin, a component of turmeric: from farm to pharmacy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2816	plant-derived health: the effects of turmeric and curcuminoids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2817	curcumin in inflammatory diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2818	curcumin: the story so far. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2819	biological actions of curcumin on articular chondrocytes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2820	turmeric (curcuma longa) inhibits inflammatory nuclear factor (nf)-κb and nf-κb-regulated gene products and induces death receptors leading to suppressed proliferation, induced chemosensitization, and suppressed osteoclastogenesis
med-2821	turmeric (curcumin) remedies gastroprotective action
med-2822	a randomized, pilot study to assess the efficacy and safety of curcumin in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2823	curcumin in cell death processes: a challenge for cam of age-related pathologies
med-2824	curcumin and cancer: an "old-age" disease with an "age-old" solution. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2825	curcumin-free turmeric exhibits anti-inflammatory and anticancer activities: identification of novel components of turmeric. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2826	diverse effects of a low dose supplement of lipidated curcumin in healthy middle aged people
med-2827	soy protein may alleviate osteoarthritis symptoms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2828	bioavailability of herbs and spices in humans as determined by ex vivo inflammatory suppression and dna strand breaks. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2829	curcumin: an orally bioavailable blocker of tnf and other pro-inflammatory biomarkers
med-2830	bioavailability of herbs and spices in humans as determined by ex vivo inflammatory suppression and dna strand breaks. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2831	curcumin: an orally bioavailable blocker of tnf and other pro-inflammatory biomarkers
med-2832	mechanisms of antimicrobial resistance in bacteria. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2833	estimating changes in public health following implementation of hazard analysis and critical control point in the united states broiler slaughter i... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2834	food animals and antimicrobials: impacts on human health
med-2835	ranking the disease burden of 14 pathogens in food sources in the united states using attribution data from outbreak investigations and expert elic... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2836	characterization of extended-spectrum cephalosporin-resistant salmonella enterica serovar heidelberg isolated from food animals, retail meat, and h... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2837	salmonella enterica serotype enteritidis: increasing incidence of domestically acquired infections. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2838	comparison of esbl contamination in organic and conventional retail chicken meat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2839	vital signs: incidence and trends of infection with pathogens transmitted commonly through food--foodborne diseases active surveillance network, 10... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2840	comparison of the prevalences and antimicrobial resistances of escherichia coli isolates from different retail meats in the united states, 2002 to 2008
med-2841	application of bayesian techniques to model the burden of human salmonellosis attributable to u.s. food commodities at the point of processing: adaptation of a danish model
med-2842	the 2009 garrod lecture: the evolution of antimicrobial resistance: a darwinian perspective. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2843	major congenital malformations in women with gestational diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2844	a prospective study of prepregnancy dietary iron intake and risk for gestational diabetes mellitus
med-2845	iron intake and the risk of type 2 diabetes in women: a prospective cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2846	a hospital based study of prevalence of gestational diabetes mellitus in an urban population of india. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2847	type 2 diabetes mellitus after gestational diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2848	the aetiology of type 1 diabetes: an epidemiological perspective. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2849	risk of gestational diabetes mellitus in relation to maternal egg and cholesterol intake
med-2850	a prospective study of prepregnancy dietary fat intake and risk of gestational diabetes
med-2851	gestational diabetes mellitus in relation to maternal dietary heme iron and nonheme iron intake
med-2852	a prospective study of dietary patterns, meat intake and the risk of gestational diabetes mellitus. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2853	gestational diabetes and pregnancy outcomes - a systematic review of the world health organization (who) and the international association of diabetes in pregnancy study groups (iadpsg) diagnostic criteria
med-2854	blueberry anthocyanins: protection against ageing and light-induced damage in retinal pigment epithelial cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2855	nearwork-induced transient myopia (nitm) and permanent myopia--is there a link? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2856	variations in product choices of frequently purchased herbs: caveat emptor. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2857	the effect of bilberry nutritional supplementation on night visual acuity and contrast sensitivity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2858	macular pigment and risk for age-related macular degeneration in subjects from a northern european population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2859	lutein and zeaxanthin intake and the risk of age-related macular degeneration: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2860	a 12-wk egg intervention increases serum zeaxanthin and macular pigment optical density in women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2861	ultraviolet phototoxicity to the retina. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2862	goji berry effects on macular characteristics and plasma antioxidant levels. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2863	iris color and macular pigment optical density. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2864	fasting plasma zeaxanthin response to fructus barbarum l. (wolfberry; kei tze) in a food-based human supplementation trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2865	cataract is a self-defence reaction to protect the retina from oxidative damage. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2866	two-year randomized, placebo-controlled study of black currant anthocyanins on visual field in glaucoma. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2867	dietary modification of human macular pigment density. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2868	blueberry anthocyanins: protection against ageing and light-induced damage in retinal pigment epithelial cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2869	macular pigment and risk for age-related macular degeneration in subjects from a northern european population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2870	a 12-wk egg intervention increases serum zeaxanthin and macular pigment optical density in women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2871	ultraviolet phototoxicity to the retina. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2872	goji berry effects on macular characteristics and plasma antioxidant levels. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2873	iris color and macular pigment optical density. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2874	fasting plasma zeaxanthin response to fructus barbarum l. (wolfberry; kei tze) in a food-based human supplementation trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2875	cataract is a self-defence reaction to protect the retina from oxidative damage. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2876	nearwork-induced transient myopia (nitm) and permanent myopia--is there a link? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2877	variations in product choices of frequently purchased herbs: caveat emptor. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2878	the effect of bilberry nutritional supplementation on night visual acuity and contrast sensitivity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2879	lutein and zeaxanthin intake and the risk of age-related macular degeneration: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2880	two-year randomized, placebo-controlled study of black currant anthocyanins on visual field in glaucoma. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2881	dietary modification of human macular pigment density. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2882	blueberry anthocyanins: protection against ageing and light-induced damage in retinal pigment epithelial cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2883	macular pigment and risk for age-related macular degeneration in subjects from a northern european population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2884	a 12-wk egg intervention increases serum zeaxanthin and macular pigment optical density in women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2885	ultraviolet phototoxicity to the retina. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2886	goji berry effects on macular characteristics and plasma antioxidant levels. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2887	iris color and macular pigment optical density. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2888	fasting plasma zeaxanthin response to fructus barbarum l. (wolfberry; kei tze) in a food-based human supplementation trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2889	cataract is a self-defence reaction to protect the retina from oxidative damage. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2890	nearwork-induced transient myopia (nitm) and permanent myopia--is there a link? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2891	variations in product choices of frequently purchased herbs: caveat emptor. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2892	the effect of bilberry nutritional supplementation on night visual acuity and contrast sensitivity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2893	lutein and zeaxanthin intake and the risk of age-related macular degeneration: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2894	two-year randomized, placebo-controlled study of black currant anthocyanins on visual field in glaucoma. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2895	dietary modification of human macular pigment density. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2896	antioxidant intake and primary open-angle glaucoma: a prospective study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2897	glaucoma risk and the consumption of fruits and vegetables among older women in the study of osteoporotic fractures. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2898	macular pigment and risk for age-related macular degeneration in subjects from a northern european population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2899	iris color and macular pigment optical density. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2900	the association of consumption of fruits/vegetables with decreased risk of glaucoma among older african american women in the study of osteoporotic fractures
med-2901	the association between glaucoma prevalence and supplementation with the oxidants calcium and iron
med-2902	hair-to-blood ratio and biological half-life of mercury: experimental study of methylmercury exposure through fish consumption in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2903	relationship between the prenatal exposure to low-level of mercury and the size of a newborn's cerebellum. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2904	dose–response relationship of prenatal mercury exposure and iq: an integrative analysis of epidemiologic data
med-2905	associations of maternal long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, methyl mercury, and infant development in the seychelles child development nutrition study
med-2906	speciation of methyl- and ethyl-mercury in hair of breastfed infants acutely exposed to thimerosal-containing vaccines. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2907	which fish should i eat? perspectives influencing fish consumption choices
med-2908	dietary lipids modulate methylmercury toxicity in atlantic salmon. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2909	abnormal neuronal migration, deranged cerebral cortical organization, and diffuse white matter astrocytosis of human fetal brain: a major effect of... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2910	sensitivity of continuous performance test (cpt) at age 14 years to developmental methylmercury exposure
med-2911	marine food pollutants as a risk factor for hypoinsulinemia and type 2 diabetes
med-2912	fish consumption, dietary long-chain n-3 fatty acids, and risk of type 2 diabetes
med-2913	elimination half-lives of polychlorinated biphenyl congeners in children
med-2914	fish consumption during child bearing age: a quantitative risk-benefit analysis on neurodevelopment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2915	reducing the staggering costs of environmental disease in children, estimated at $76.6 billion in 2008. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2916	do national advisories serve local consumers: an assessment of mercury in economically important north carolina fish. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2917	nutrients and contaminants in human milk from mothers on macrobiotic and omnivorous diets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2918	smoking and lung cancer risk in american and japanese men: an international case-control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2919	awareness and knowledge of methylmercury in fish in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2920	functional mri approach to developmental methylmercury and polychlorinated biphenyl neurotoxicity
med-2921	evidence on the human health effects of low-level methylmercury exposure
med-2922	berry fruits for cancer prevention: current status and future prospects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2923	death receptor ligands in tumors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2924	recent trends and advances in berry health benefits research. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2925	immunomodulatory effects of a standardized lycium barbarum fruit juice in chinese older healthy human subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2926	in vitro investigation of the potential immunomodulatory and anti-cancer activities of black pepper (piper nigrum) and cardamom (elettaria cardamom... - pubmed - ncbi
med-2927	effect of blueberry ingestion on natural killer cell counts, oxidative stress, and inflammation prior to and after 2.5 h of running. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2928	ash 50th anniversary review: human natural killer cells
med-2929	homocysteine, circulating vascular cell adhesion molecule and carotid atherosclerosis in postmenopausal vegetarian women and omnivores. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2930	arterial function of carotid and brachial arteries in postmenopausal vegetarians
med-2931	radiation and chest ct scan examinations: what do we know? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2932	common carotid intima-media thickness is predictive of all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in elderly community-dwelling people: longitudinal investigation for the longevity and aging in hokkaido county (lilac) study
med-2933	the impact of vegan diet on b-12 status in healthy omnivores: five-year prospective study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2934	long-term low-calorie low-protein vegan diet and endurance exercise are associated with low cardiometabolic risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2935	chinese lacto-vegetarian diet exerts favorable effects on metabolic parameters, intima-media thickness, and cardiovascular risks in healthy men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2936	vitamin b-12 supplementation improves arterial function in vegetarians with subnormal vitamin b-12 status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2937	radiation dose from contemporary cardiothoracic multidetector ct protocols with an anthropomorphic female phantom: implications for cancer induction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2938	homocysteine, circulating vascular cell adhesion molecule and carotid atherosclerosis in postmenopausal vegetarian women and omnivores. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2939	arterial function of carotid and brachial arteries in postmenopausal vegetarians
med-2940	radiation and chest ct scan examinations: what do we know? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2941	common carotid intima-media thickness is predictive of all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in elderly community-dwelling people: longitudinal investigation for the longevity and aging in hokkaido county (lilac) study
med-2942	the impact of vegan diet on b-12 status in healthy omnivores: five-year prospective study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2943	long-term low-calorie low-protein vegan diet and endurance exercise are associated with low cardiometabolic risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2944	systematic review of the incidence of sudden cardiac death in the united states
med-2945	chinese lacto-vegetarian diet exerts favorable effects on metabolic parameters, intima-media thickness, and cardiovascular risks in healthy men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2946	vitamin b-12 supplementation improves arterial function in vegetarians with subnormal vitamin b-12 status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2947	radiation dose from contemporary cardiothoracic multidetector ct protocols with an anthropomorphic female phantom: implications for cancer induction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2948	lipophilic and hydrophilic antioxidant capacities of common foods in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2949	plasma antioxidant capacity changes following a meal as a measure of the ability of a food to alter in vivo antioxidant status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2950	atherogenesis: a postprandial phenomenon. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2951	the total antioxidant content of more than 3100 foods, beverages, spices, herbs and supplements used worldwide
med-2952	postprandial plasma lipid hydroperoxides: a possible link between diet and atherosclerosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2953	orange juice or fructose intake does not induce oxidative and inflammatory response. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2954	postprandial metabolic events and fruit-derived phenolics: a review of the science. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2955	glucose challenge stimulates reactive oxygen species (ros) generation by leucocytes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2956	strawberry modulates ldl oxidation and postprandial lipemia in response to high-fat meal in overweight hyperlipidemic men and women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2957	lipophilic and hydrophilic antioxidant capacities of common foods in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2958	plasma antioxidant capacity changes following a meal as a measure of the ability of a food to alter in vivo antioxidant status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2959	atherogenesis: a postprandial phenomenon. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2960	postprandial plasma lipid hydroperoxides: a possible link between diet and atherosclerosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2961	orange juice or fructose intake does not induce oxidative and inflammatory response. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2962	postprandial metabolic events and fruit-derived phenolics: a review of the science. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2963	glucose challenge stimulates reactive oxygen species (ros) generation by leucocytes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2964	strawberry modulates ldl oxidation and postprandial lipemia in response to high-fat meal in overweight hyperlipidemic men and women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2965	lipophilic and hydrophilic antioxidant capacities of common foods in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2966	plasma antioxidant capacity changes following a meal as a measure of the ability of a food to alter in vivo antioxidant status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2967	atherogenesis: a postprandial phenomenon. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2968	postprandial plasma lipid hydroperoxides: a possible link between diet and atherosclerosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2969	orange juice or fructose intake does not induce oxidative and inflammatory response. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2970	postprandial metabolic events and fruit-derived phenolics: a review of the science. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2971	glucose challenge stimulates reactive oxygen species (ros) generation by leucocytes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2972	strawberry modulates ldl oxidation and postprandial lipemia in response to high-fat meal in overweight hyperlipidemic men and women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2973	egg consumption and the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus: a case-control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2974	egg consumption and cardiovascular disease and mortality the physicians' health study
med-2975	egg consumption and the risk of diabetes in adults, jiangsu, china. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2976	egg consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes in older adults
med-2977	egg consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes in men and women
med-2978	high intakes of protein and processed meat associate with increased incidence of type 2 diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2979	neuroprotective effect of the natural iron chelator, phytic acid in a cell culture model of parkinson's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2980	inositol hexakisphosphate inhibits osteoclastogenesis on raw 264.7 cells and human primary osteoclasts
med-2981	phytate in foods and significance for humans: food sources, intake, processing, bioavailability, protective role and analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2982	surgical management of bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw in oncologic patients: a challenging problem. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2983	ascorbic acid prevents the dose-dependent inhibitory effects of polyphenols and phytates on nonheme-iron absorption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2984	an algorithm to assess intestinal iron availability for use in dietary surveys
med-2985	phytate (myo-inositol hexaphosphate) and risk factors for osteoporosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2986	effect of phytic acid on the absorption, distribution, and endogenous excretion of zinc in rats. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2987	protective effect of myo-inositol hexaphosphate (phytate) on bone mass loss in postmenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2988	the role of phytic acid in legumes: antinutrient or beneficial function? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2989	phytate levels and bone parameters: a retrospective pilot clinical trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2990	bisphosphonate-associated osteonecrosis of the jaw: report of a task force of the american society for bone and mineral research. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2991	the autopsy of chicken nuggets reads "chicken little". - pubmed - ncbi
med-2992	toxicity and carcinogenicity studies of 4-methylimidazole in f344/n rats and b6c3f1 mice
med-2993	does 4-methylimidazole have tumor preventive activity in the rat? - pubmed - ncbi
med-2994	carcinogenicity and regulation of caramel colorings. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2995	western diseases and their emergence related to diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2996	red meat consumption and cancer: reasons to suspect involvement of bovine infectious factors in colorectal cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2997	the etiological significance of related diseases
med-2998	towards a new system of health: the challenge of western disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-2999	western diseases and their emergence related to diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3000	red meat consumption and cancer: reasons to suspect involvement of bovine infectious factors in colorectal cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3001	towards a new system of health: the challenge of western disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3002	evidence on the human health effects of low-level methylmercury exposure
med-3003	hair-to-blood ratio and biological half-life of mercury: experimental study of methylmercury exposure through fish consumption in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3004	the many faces of methylmercury poisoning. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3005	relationship between the prenatal exposure to low-level of mercury and the size of a newborn's cerebellum. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3006	dietary lipids modulate methylmercury toxicity in atlantic salmon. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3007	abnormal neuronal migration, deranged cerebral cortical organization, and diffuse white matter astrocytosis of human fetal brain: a major effect of... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3008	dose–response relationship of prenatal mercury exposure and iq: an integrative analysis of epidemiologic data
med-3009	marine food pollutants as a risk factor for hypoinsulinemia and type 2 diabetes
med-3010	fish consumption, dietary long-chain n-3 fatty acids, and risk of type 2 diabetes
med-3011	which fish should i eat? perspectives influencing fish consumption choices
med-3012	fish consumption during child bearing age: a quantitative risk-benefit analysis on neurodevelopment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3013	reducing the staggering costs of environmental disease in children, estimated at $76.6 billion in 2008. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3014	do national advisories serve local consumers: an assessment of mercury in economically important north carolina fish. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3015	associations of maternal long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, methyl mercury, and infant development in the seychelles child development nutrition study
med-3016	smoking and lung cancer risk in american and japanese men: an international case-control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3017	awareness and knowledge of methylmercury in fish in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3018	functional mri approach to developmental methylmercury and polychlorinated biphenyl neurotoxicity
med-3019	evidence on the human health effects of low-level methylmercury exposure
med-3020	an analysis of autopsy brain tissue from infants prenatally exposed to methymercury. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3021	hair-to-blood ratio and biological half-life of mercury: experimental study of methylmercury exposure through fish consumption in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3022	the many faces of methylmercury poisoning. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3023	relationship between the prenatal exposure to low-level of mercury and the size of a newborn's cerebellum. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3024	dietary lipids modulate methylmercury toxicity in atlantic salmon. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3025	abnormal neuronal migration, deranged cerebral cortical organization, and diffuse white matter astrocytosis of human fetal brain: a major effect of... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3026	dose–response relationship of prenatal mercury exposure and iq: an integrative analysis of epidemiologic data
med-3027	marine food pollutants as a risk factor for hypoinsulinemia and type 2 diabetes
med-3028	fish consumption, dietary long-chain n-3 fatty acids, and risk of type 2 diabetes
med-3029	which fish should i eat? perspectives influencing fish consumption choices
med-3030	do national advisories serve local consumers: an assessment of mercury in economically important north carolina fish. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3031	a quantitative synthesis of mercury in commercial seafood and implications for exposure in the united states
med-3032	associations of maternal long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, methyl mercury, and infant development in the seychelles child development nutrition study
med-3033	smoking and lung cancer risk in american and japanese men: an international case-control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3034	awareness and knowledge of methylmercury in fish in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3035	functional mri approach to developmental methylmercury and polychlorinated biphenyl neurotoxicity
med-3036	frequent ice cream consumption is associated with reduced striatal response to receipt of an ice cream–based milkshake
med-3037	functional mri of human hypothalamic responses following glucose ingestion. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3038	effects of naltrexone on food intake and changes in subjective appetite during eating: evidence for opioid involvement in the appetizer effect. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3039	obesity and addiction: neurobiological overlaps. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3040	fat intake modulates cerebral blood flow in homeostatic and gustatory brain areas in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3041	does food addiction exist? a phenomenological discussion based on the psychiatric classification of substance-related disorders and addiction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3042	food and drug reward: overlapping circuits in human obesity and addiction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3043	the opioid system and food intake: homeostatic and hedonic mechanisms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3044	cue-induced cocaine craving: neuroanatomical specificity for drug users and drug stimuli. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3045	brain pet imaging in obesity and food addiction: current evidence and hypothesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3046	changes in brain activation associated with reward processing in smokers and nonsmokers. a positron emission tomography study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3047	implications from addiction research towards the understanding and treatment of obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3048	brain functional magnetic resonance imaging response to glucose and fructose infusions in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3049	the neural correlates of “food addiction”
med-3050	frequent ice cream consumption is associated with reduced striatal response to receipt of an ice cream–based milkshake
med-3051	functional mri of human hypothalamic responses following glucose ingestion. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3052	obesity and addiction: neurobiological overlaps. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3053	fat intake modulates cerebral blood flow in homeostatic and gustatory brain areas in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3054	does food addiction exist? a phenomenological discussion based on the psychiatric classification of substance-related disorders and addiction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3055	food and drug reward: overlapping circuits in human obesity and addiction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3056	the opioid system and food intake: homeostatic and hedonic mechanisms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3057	brain pet imaging in obesity and food addiction: current evidence and hypothesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3058	implications from addiction research towards the understanding and treatment of obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3059	brain functional magnetic resonance imaging response to glucose and fructose infusions in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3060	the neural correlates of “food addiction”
med-3061	the prevalence of phosphorus containing food additives in top selling foods in grocery stores
med-3062	effects of polyphosphate additives on campylobacter survival in processed chicken exudates
med-3063	prevalence and public health significance of aluminum residues in milk and some dairy products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3064	hidden sources of phosphorus in the typical american diet: does it matter in nephrology? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3065	phosphorus containing food additives and the accuracy of nutrient databases: implications for renal patients
med-3066	phosphate additives in food—a health risk
med-3067	lack of awareness among future medical professionals about the risk of consuming hidden phosphate-containing processed food and drinks
med-3068	extra-phosphate load from food additives in commonly eaten foods: a real and insidious danger for renal patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3069	dietary phosphorus restriction in dialysis patients: potential impact of processed meat, poultry, and fish products as protein sources. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3070	descriptive sensory analysis of broiler breast fillets marinated in phosphate, salt, and acid solutions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3071	effects of polyphosphate additives on the ph of processed chicken exudates and the survival of campylobacter. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3072	original articles: phosphorus and potassium content of enhanced meat and poultry products: implications for patients who receive dialysis
med-3073	the prevalence of phosphorus containing food additives in top selling foods in grocery stores
med-3074	effects of polyphosphate additives on campylobacter survival in processed chicken exudates
med-3075	prevalence and public health significance of aluminum residues in milk and some dairy products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3076	hidden sources of phosphorus in the typical american diet: does it matter in nephrology? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3077	lack of awareness among future medical professionals about the risk of consuming hidden phosphate-containing processed food and drinks
med-3078	extra-phosphate load from food additives in commonly eaten foods: a real and insidious danger for renal patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3079	effects of polyphosphate additives on the ph of processed chicken exudates and the survival of campylobacter. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3080	phosphorus containing food additives and the accuracy of nutrient databases: implications for renal patients
med-3081	phosphate additives in food—a health risk
med-3082	dietary phosphorus restriction in dialysis patients: potential impact of processed meat, poultry, and fish products as protein sources. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3083	descriptive sensory analysis of broiler breast fillets marinated in phosphate, salt, and acid solutions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3084	original articles: phosphorus and potassium content of enhanced meat and poultry products: implications for patients who receive dialysis
med-3085	the prevalence of phosphorus containing food additives in top selling foods in grocery stores
med-3086	effects of polyphosphate additives on campylobacter survival in processed chicken exudates
med-3087	prevalence and public health significance of aluminum residues in milk and some dairy products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3088	hidden sources of phosphorus in the typical american diet: does it matter in nephrology? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3089	phosphorus containing food additives and the accuracy of nutrient databases: implications for renal patients
med-3090	phosphate additives in food—a health risk
med-3091	lack of awareness among future medical professionals about the risk of consuming hidden phosphate-containing processed food and drinks
med-3092	extra-phosphate load from food additives in commonly eaten foods: a real and insidious danger for renal patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3093	dietary phosphorus restriction in dialysis patients: potential impact of processed meat, poultry, and fish products as protein sources. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3094	descriptive sensory analysis of broiler breast fillets marinated in phosphate, salt, and acid solutions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3095	effects of polyphosphate additives on the ph of processed chicken exudates and the survival of campylobacter. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3096	original articles: phosphorus and potassium content of enhanced meat and poultry products: implications for patients who receive dialysis
med-3097	you ahr what you eat: linking diet and immunity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3098	camel urine inhibits the cytochrome p450 1a1 gene expression through an ahr-dependent mechanism in hepa 1c1c7 cell line. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3099	the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and its xenobiotic ligands: a fundamental trigger for cardiovascular diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3100	flavones and flavonols at dietary levels inhibit a transformation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor induced by dioxin. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3101	biology and function of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor: report of an international and interdisciplinary conference. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3102	an update on the dietary ligands of the ahr. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3103	intraepithelial lymphocytes: to serve and protect
med-3104	immunity, inflammation, and allergy in the gut. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3105	starting at the beginning: new perspectives on the biology of mucosal t cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3106	the aryl hydrocarbon receptor in inflammatory bowel disease: linking the environment to disease pathogenesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3107	iels: enforcing law and order in the court of the intestinal epithelium. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3108	epithelial barrier biology: good fences make good neighbours
med-3109	you ahr what you eat: linking diet and immunity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3110	aryl hydrocarbon receptor (ahr)-active pharmaceuticals are selective ahr modulators in mda-mb-468 and bt474 breast cancer cells
med-3111	the light and dark sides of intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes
med-3112	biology and function of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor: report of an international and interdisciplinary conference. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3113	the emergence of "lifestyle medicine" as a structured approach for management of chronic disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3114	can lifestyle changes reverse coronary heart disease? the lifestyle heart trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3115	americans do not meet federal dietary recommendations
med-3116	perceptions of flatulence from bean consumption among adults in 3 feeding studies
med-3117	soy food intake after diagnosis of breast cancer and survival: an in-depth analysis of combined evidence from cohort studies of us and chinese women
med-3118	legumes: the most important dietary predictor of survival in older people of different ethnicities. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3119	a bean-free diet increases the risk of all-cause mortality among taiwanese women: the role of the metabolic syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3120	positive effects of soy isoflavone food on survival of breast cancer patients in china. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3121	gastrointestinal symptoms in 3181 volunteers ingesting snack foods containing olestra or triglycerides. a 6-week randomized, placebo-controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3122	influence of frequent and long-term bean consumption on colonic function and fermentation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3123	the dietcomplyf study: a prospective cohort study of breast cancer survival and phytoestrogen consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3124	perceptions of flatulence from bean consumption among adults in 3 feeding studies
med-3125	soy food intake after diagnosis of breast cancer and survival: an in-depth analysis of combined evidence from cohort studies of us and chinese women
med-3126	legumes: the most important dietary predictor of survival in older people of different ethnicities. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3127	study on soy isoflavone consumption and risk of breast cancer and survival. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3128	gastrointestinal symptoms in 3181 volunteers ingesting snack foods containing olestra or triglycerides. a 6-week randomized, placebo-controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3129	brca1-methylated sporadic breast cancers are brca-like in showing a basal phenotype and absence of er expression. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3130	can soy phytoestrogens decrease dna methylation in brca1 and brca2 oncosuppressor genes in breast cancer? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3131	americans do not meet federal dietary recommendations
med-3132	legume promotion in counselling: an e-mail survey of dietitians. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3133	a bean-free diet increases the risk of all-cause mortality among taiwanese women: the role of the metabolic syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3134	positive effects of soy isoflavone food on survival of breast cancer patients in china. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3135	cpg island tumor suppressor promoter methylation in non-brca-associated early mammary carcinogenesis
med-3136	influence of frequent and long-term bean consumption on colonic function and fermentation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3137	americans do not meet federal dietary recommendations
med-3138	perceptions of flatulence from bean consumption among adults in 3 feeding studies
med-3139	soy food intake after diagnosis of breast cancer and survival: an in-depth analysis of combined evidence from cohort studies of us and chinese women
med-3140	legumes: the most important dietary predictor of survival in older people of different ethnicities. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3141	a bean-free diet increases the risk of all-cause mortality among taiwanese women: the role of the metabolic syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3142	positive effects of soy isoflavone food on survival of breast cancer patients in china. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3143	gastrointestinal symptoms in 3181 volunteers ingesting snack foods containing olestra or triglycerides. a 6-week randomized, placebo-controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3144	optimized lc/ms/ms analysis of morphine and codeine in poppy seed and evaluation of their fate during food processing as a basis for risk analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3145	morphine levels in urine subsequent to poppy seed consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3146	poppy seed foods and opiate drug testing--where are we today? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3147	a vegetarian dietary pattern as a nutrient-dense approach to weight management: an analysis of the national health and nutrition examination survey... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3148	sympathetic nervous system activity and resting metabolic rate in vegetarians. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3149	four therapeutic diets: adherence and acceptability. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3150	do circulating leucocytes and lymphocyte subtypes increase in response to brief exercise in children with and without asthma?
med-3151	baker's yeast β-glucan supplementation increases monocytes and cytokines post-exercise: implications for infection risk? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3152	can nutrition limit exercise-induced immunodepression? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3153	effect of beta 1, 3/1, 6 glucan on upper respiratory tract infection symptoms and mood state in marathon athletes
med-3154	is infection risk linked to exercise workload? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3155	aerobic fitness is associated with lower proportions of senescent blood t-cells in man. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3156	short-term blackcurrant extract consumption modulates exercise-induced oxidative stress and lipopolysaccharide-stimulated inflammatory responses. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3157	effect of vitamin c supplements on physical performance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3158	inhibition of xanthine oxidase by flavonoids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3159	exercise-induced oxidative stress:myths, realities and physiological relevance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3160	could a vegetarian diet reduce exercise-induced oxidative stress? a review of the literature. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3161	effect of lemon verbena supplementation on muscular damage markers, proinflammatory cytokines release and neutrophils' oxidative stress in chronic ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3162	endurance exercise results in dna damage as detected by the comet assay. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3163	antioxidants prevent health-promoting effects of physical exercise in humans
med-3164	can nutrition limit exercise-induced immunodepression? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3165	free radicals in skin and muscle: damaging agents or signals for adaptation? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3166	the effect of acute pre-exercise dark chocolate consumption on plasma antioxidant status, oxidative stress and immunoendocrine responses to prolong... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3167	influence of tart cherry juice on indices of recovery following marathon running. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3168	flavonoid glycosides isolated from unique legume plant extracts as novel inhibitors of xanthine oxidase
med-3169	calcified neurocysticercosis among patients with primary headache. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3170	cognitive changes and quality of life in neurocysticercosis: a longitudinal study
med-3171	freezing of infested pork muscle kills cysticerci. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3172	neurocysticercosis and oncogenesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3173	natural mood foods: the actions of polyphenols against psychiatric and cognitive disorders
med-3174	the impact of neurocysticercosis in california: a review of hospitalized cases
med-3175	neurocysticercosis in pregnancy: not just another headache. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3176	is dementia reversible in patients with neurocysticercosis?
med-3177	neurocysticercosis: the enigmatic disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3178	clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and treatment of neurocysticercosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3179	cognitive impairment and dementia in neurocysticercosis: a cross-sectional controlled study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3180	aneurysm and neurocysticercosis: casual or causal relationship? case report and review of the literature
med-3181	psychiatric manifestations of neurocysticercosis: a study of 38 patients from a neurology clinic in brazil.
med-3182	a review of cases of human cysticercosis in canada. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3183	11c-choline vs. 18f-fdg pet/ct in assessing bone involvement in patients with multiple myeloma
med-3184	detection of increased choline compounds with proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy subsequent to malignant transformation of human prosta... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3185	choline intake and risk of lethal prostate cancer: incidence and survival
med-3186	intakes of meat, fish, poultry, and eggs and risk of prostate cancer progression
med-3187	egg, red meat, and poultry intake and risk of lethal prostate cancer in the prostate specific antigen-era: incidence and survival
med-3188	one-carbon metabolism and prostate cancer risk: prospective investigation of seven circulating b vitamins and metabolites. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3189	choline- and betaine-defined diets for use in clinical research and for the management of trimethylaminuria. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3190	gut flora metabolism of phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease
med-3191	detection of increased choline compounds with proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy subsequent to malignant transformation of human prosta... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3192	choline intake and risk of lethal prostate cancer: incidence and survival
med-3193	11c-choline vs. 18f-fdg pet/ct in assessing bone involvement in patients with multiple myeloma
med-3194	fish odour syndrome
med-3195	choline and betaine intake and the risk of colorectal cancer in men
med-3196	one-carbon metabolism and prostate cancer risk: prospective investigation of seven circulating b vitamins and metabolites. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3197	beef in an optimal lean diet study: effects on lipids, lipoproteins, and apolipoproteins
med-3198	cheese intake in large amounts lowers ldl-cholesterol concentrations compared with butter intake of equal fat content. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3199	potential risks resulting from fruit/vegetable-drug interactions: effects on drug-metabolizing enzymes and drug transporters. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3200	prospective study of grapefruit intake and risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women: the multiethnic cohort study
med-3201	effects of grapefruit, grapefruit juice and water preloads on energy balance, weight loss, body composition, and cardiometabolic risk in free-living obese adults
med-3202	inhibitory effect of grapefruit juice and its bitter principal, naringenin, on cyp1a2 dependent metabolism of caffeine in man.
med-3203	red grapefruit positively influences serum triglyceride level in patients suffering from coronary atherosclerosis: studies in vitro and in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3204	management of grapefruit-drug interactions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3205	prospective study of the association between grapefruit intake and risk of breast cancer in the european prospective investigation into cancer and ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3206	the effects of grapefruit on weight and insulin resistance: relationship to the metabolic syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3207	the grapefruit: an old wine in a new glass? metabolic and cardiovascular perspectives
med-3208	a low-energy-dense diet adding fruit reduces weight and energy intake in women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3209	can grapefruit juice influence ethinylestradiol bioavailability? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3210	the effects of daily consumption of grapefruit on body weight, lipids, and blood pressure in healthy, overweight adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3211	hypercalciuria associated with high dietary protein intake is not due to acid load
med-3212	dietary protein and bone health: harmonizing conflicting theories. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3213	the alkaline diet: is there evidence that an alkaline ph diet benefits health?
med-3214	dietary protein and bone health: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3215	excess dietary protein can adversely affect bone. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3216	low protein intake: the impact on calcium and bone homeostasis in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3217	age and systemic acid-base equilibrium: analysis of published data. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3218	diet-induced metabolic acidosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3219	the impact of dietary protein on calcium absorption and kinetic measures of bone turnover in women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3220	alkaline diets favor lean tissue mass in older adults
med-3221	effect of urine ph changed by dietary intervention on uric acid clearance mechanism of ph-dependent excretion of urinary uric acid
med-3222	protein intake, calcium balance and health consequences. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3223	estimated net acid excretion inversely correlates with urine ph in vegans, lacto-ovo vegetarians, and omnivores. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3224	a diet high in meat protein and potential renal acid load increases fractional calcium absorption and urinary calcium excretion without affecting m... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3225	nutrient based estimation of acid-base balance in vegetarians and non-vegetarians. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3226	hypercalciuria associated with high dietary protein intake is not due to acid load
med-3227	the impact of dietary protein on calcium absorption and kinetic measures of bone turnover in women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3228	dietary protein and bone health: harmonizing conflicting theories. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3229	protein intake, calcium balance and health consequences. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3230	estimated net acid excretion inversely correlates with urine ph in vegans, lacto-ovo vegetarians, and omnivores. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3231	the alkaline diet: is there evidence that an alkaline ph diet benefits health?
med-3232	dietary acid load is associated with lower bone mineral density in men with low intake of dietary calcium
med-3233	a diet high in meat protein and potential renal acid load increases fractional calcium absorption and urinary calcium excretion without affecting m... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3234	dietary protein and bone health: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3235	alkaline diets favor lean tissue mass in older adults
med-3236	nutrient based estimation of acid-base balance in vegetarians and non-vegetarians. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3237	diet-induced metabolic acidosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3238	vegetable intake is associated with reduced breast cancer recurrence in tamoxifen users: a secondary analysis from the women's healthy eating and l... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3239	healthy lifestyle on the risk of breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3240	is concordance with world cancer research fund/american institute for cancer research guidelines for cancer prevention related to subsequent risk o... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3241	significant changes in dietary intake and supplement use after breast cancer diagnosis in a uk multicentre study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3242	macronutrient intake and risk of urothelial cell carcinoma in the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3243	a dietary intervention for recurrent prostate cancer after definitive primary treatment: results of a randomized pilot trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3244	a novel measure of dietary change in a prostate cancer dietary program incorporating mindfulness training
med-3245	vegetable and fruit intake after diagnosis and risk of prostate cancer progression
med-3246	intensive lifestyle changes may affect the progression of prostate cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3247	evidence report: the efficacy and safety of mitoxantrone (novantrone) in the treatment of multiple sclerosis
med-3248	retinal arterial changes correlate with cerebral small-vessel disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3249	effect of low saturated fat diet in early and late cases of multiple sclerosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3250	improvement of endothelium-dependent coronary vasodilation after a single ldl apheresis in patients with hypercholesterolemia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3251	association between use of interferon beta and progression of disability in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3252	the molecular basis of nutritional intervention in multiple sclerosis: a narrative review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3253	pathobiological determinants of atherosclerosis in youth risk scores are associated with early and advanced atherosclerosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3254	relation of serum lipoprotein levels and systolic blood pressure to early atherosclerosis. the bogalusa heart study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3255	endothelial function in healthy 11-year-old children after dietary intervention with onset in infancy: the special turku coronary risk factor inter... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3256	protein methionine content and mda-lysine adducts are inversely related to maximum life span in the heart of mammals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3257	can dietary methionine restriction increase the effectiveness of chemotherapy in treatment of advanced cancer? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3258	colorectal cancer screening with odour material by canine scent detection
med-3259	the low-methionine content of vegan diets may make methionine restriction feasible as a life extension strategy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3260	olfactory detection of human bladder cancer by dogs: proof of principle study
med-3261	the effect of replacement of methionine by homocystine on survival of malignant and normal adult mammalian cells in culture
med-3262	a review of methionine dependency and the role of methionine restriction in cancer growth control and life-span extension. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3263	expression of the biochemical defect of methionine dependence in fresh patient tumors in primary histoculture. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3264	sniffer dogs as part of a bimodal bionic research approach to develop a lung cancer screening
med-3265	chitin synthesis and degradation as targets for pesticide action. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3266	methionine dependency and cancer treatment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3267	targeting methionine auxotrophy in cancer: discovery & exploration. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3268	generation of gaseous sulfur-containing compounds in tumour tissue and suppression of gas diffusion as an antitumour treatment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3269	lowered methionine ingestion as responsible for the decrease in rodent mitochondrial oxidative stress in protein and dietary restriction possible i... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3270	protein methionine content and mda-lysine adducts are inversely related to maximum life span in the heart of mammals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3271	can dietary methionine restriction increase the effectiveness of chemotherapy in treatment of advanced cancer? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3272	colorectal cancer screening with odour material by canine scent detection
med-3273	the low-methionine content of vegan diets may make methionine restriction feasible as a life extension strategy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3274	olfactory detection of human bladder cancer by dogs: proof of principle study
med-3275	the effect of replacement of methionine by homocystine on survival of malignant and normal adult mammalian cells in culture
med-3276	a review of methionine dependency and the role of methionine restriction in cancer growth control and life-span extension. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3277	expression of the biochemical defect of methionine dependence in fresh patient tumors in primary histoculture. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3278	sniffer dogs as part of a bimodal bionic research approach to develop a lung cancer screening
med-3279	chitin synthesis and degradation as targets for pesticide action. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3280	methionine dependency and cancer treatment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3281	targeting methionine auxotrophy in cancer: discovery & exploration. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3282	generation of gaseous sulfur-containing compounds in tumour tissue and suppression of gas diffusion as an antitumour treatment. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3283	lowered methionine ingestion as responsible for the decrease in rodent mitochondrial oxidative stress in protein and dietary restriction possible i... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3284	non-occupational malignant pleural mesothelioma due to asbestos and non-asbestos fibres. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3285	farming, growing up on a farm, and haematological cancer mortality. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3286	mortality in workers employed in pig abattoirs and processing plants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3287	third wave of asbestos-related disease from secondary use of asbestos. a case report from industry. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3288	outbreak of progressive inflammatory neuropathy following exposure to aerosolized porcine neural tissue. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3289	a new type of hypersensitivity pneumonitis: salami brusher's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3290	cancer mortality in workers employed in cattle, pigs, and sheep slaughtering and processing plants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3291	synergism of alcohol, diabetes, and viral hepatitis on the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in blacks and whites in the u.s. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3292	the restriction of zoonotic perv transmission by human apobec3g
med-3293	occupational toxicology of asbestos-related malignancies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3294	emerging and re-emerging swine viruses. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3295	cancer and noncancer mortality among american seafood workers
med-3296	occupation and risk of lymphoma: a multicentre prospective cohort study (epic). - pubmed - ncbi
med-3297	a pilot case-cohort study of liver and pancreatic cancers in poultry workers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3298	an outbreak of neurological autoimmunity with polyradiculoneuropathy in workers exposed to aerosolised porcine neural tissue: a descriptive study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3299	cancer mortality in poultry slaughtering/processing plant workers belonging to a union pension fund. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3300	auto-immune polyradiculoneuropathy and a novel igg biomarker in workers exposed to aerosolized porcine brain. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3301	cigarette smoking and pancreatic cancer: a pooled analysis from the pancreatic cancer cohort consortium
med-3302	a clustering of immune-mediated polyradiculoneuropathy among swine abattoir workers exposed to aerosolized porcine brains, indiana, united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3303	industrial hygiene assessment of reticuloendotheliosis viruses exposure in the poultry industry. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3304	occupational exposure assessment using antibody levels: exposure to avian leukosis/sarcoma viruses in the poultry industry. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3305	non-occupational malignant pleural mesothelioma due to asbestos and non-asbestos fibres. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3306	farming, growing up on a farm, and haematological cancer mortality. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3307	mortality in workers employed in pig abattoirs and processing plants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3308	third wave of asbestos-related disease from secondary use of asbestos. a case report from industry. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3309	the restriction of zoonotic perv transmission by human apobec3g
med-3310	a new type of hypersensitivity pneumonitis: salami brusher's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3311	cancer mortality in workers employed in cattle, pigs, and sheep slaughtering and processing plants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3312	synergism of alcohol, diabetes, and viral hepatitis on the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in blacks and whites in the u.s. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3313	occupational toxicology of asbestos-related malignancies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3314	occupation and risk of lymphoma: a multicentre prospective cohort study (epic). - pubmed - ncbi
med-3315	a pilot case-cohort study of liver and pancreatic cancers in poultry workers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3316	an outbreak of neurological autoimmunity with polyradiculoneuropathy in workers exposed to aerosolised porcine neural tissue: a descriptive study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3317	auto-immune polyradiculoneuropathy and a novel igg biomarker in workers exposed to aerosolized porcine brain. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3318	cigarette smoking and pancreatic cancer: a pooled analysis from the pancreatic cancer cohort consortium
med-3319	epidemiologic investigation of immune-mediated polyradiculoneuropathy among abattoir workers exposed to porcine brain
med-3320	industrial hygiene assessment of reticuloendotheliosis viruses exposure in the poultry industry. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3321	occupational exposure assessment using antibody levels: exposure to avian leukosis/sarcoma viruses in the poultry industry. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3322	hiding vegetables to reduce energy density: an effective strategy to increase children's vegetable intake and reduce energy intake
med-3323	appealing to vanity: could potential appearance improvement motivate fruit and vegetable consumption?
med-3324	hidden vegetables: an effective strategy to reduce energy intake and increase vegetable intake in adults
med-3325	effect of dietary sodium restriction on taste responses to sodium chloride: a longitudinal study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3326	the color red reduces snack food and soft drink intake. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3327	are free fatty acids effective taste stimuli in humans? presented at the symposium "the taste for fat: new discoveries on the role of fat in sensor... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3328	skin blood perfusion and oxygenation colour affect perceived human health
med-3329	lip colour affects perceived sex typicality and attractiveness of human faces. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3330	recent fat intake modulates fat taste sensitivity in lean and overweight subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3331	desire to eat high- and low-fat foods following a low-fat dietary intervention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3332	the influence of social involvement, neighborhood aesthetics, and community garden participation on fruit and vegetable consumption
med-3333	oral sensitivity to oleic acid is associated with fat intake and body mass index. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3334	you are what you eat: within-subject increases in fruit and vegetable consumption confer beneficial skin-color changes
med-3335	skin blood perfusion and oxygenation colour affect perceived human health
med-3336	hiding vegetables to reduce energy density: an effective strategy to increase children's vegetable intake and reduce energy intake
med-3337	appealing to vanity: could potential appearance improvement motivate fruit and vegetable consumption?
med-3338	hidden vegetables: an effective strategy to reduce energy intake and increase vegetable intake in adults
med-3339	effect of dietary sodium restriction on taste responses to sodium chloride: a longitudinal study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3340	recent fat intake modulates fat taste sensitivity in lean and overweight subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3341	desire to eat high- and low-fat foods following a low-fat dietary intervention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3342	the influence of social involvement, neighborhood aesthetics, and community garden participation on fruit and vegetable consumption
med-3343	the color red reduces snack food and soft drink intake. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3344	are free fatty acids effective taste stimuli in humans? presented at the symposium "the taste for fat: new discoveries on the role of fat in sensor... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3345	oral sensitivity to oleic acid is associated with fat intake and body mass index. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3346	you are what you eat: within-subject increases in fruit and vegetable consumption confer beneficial skin-color changes
med-3347	hiding vegetables to reduce energy density: an effective strategy to increase children's vegetable intake and reduce energy intake
med-3348	appealing to vanity: could potential appearance improvement motivate fruit and vegetable consumption?
med-3349	hidden vegetables: an effective strategy to reduce energy intake and increase vegetable intake in adults
med-3350	effect of dietary sodium restriction on taste responses to sodium chloride: a longitudinal study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3351	the color red reduces snack food and soft drink intake. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3352	are free fatty acids effective taste stimuli in humans? presented at the symposium "the taste for fat: new discoveries on the role of fat in sensor... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3353	skin blood perfusion and oxygenation colour affect perceived human health
med-3354	lip colour affects perceived sex typicality and attractiveness of human faces. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3355	recent fat intake modulates fat taste sensitivity in lean and overweight subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3356	desire to eat high- and low-fat foods following a low-fat dietary intervention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3357	the influence of social involvement, neighborhood aesthetics, and community garden participation on fruit and vegetable consumption
med-3358	oral sensitivity to oleic acid is associated with fat intake and body mass index. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3359	you are what you eat: within-subject increases in fruit and vegetable consumption confer beneficial skin-color changes
med-3360	hiding vegetables to reduce energy density: an effective strategy to increase children's vegetable intake and reduce energy intake
med-3361	serving styles of raw snack vegetables. what do children want? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3362	hidden vegetables: an effective strategy to reduce energy intake and increase vegetable intake in adults
med-3363	associations of parenting styles, parental feeding practices and child characteristics with young children's fruit and vegetable consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3364	the influence of social involvement, neighborhood aesthetics, and community garden participation on fruit and vegetable consumption
med-3365	attractive names sustain increased vegetable intake in schools. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3366	classroom "cupcake" celebrations: observations of foods offered and consumed. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3367	"split them!" smaller item sizes of cookies lead to a decrease in energy intake in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3368	offering “dip” promotes intake of a moderately-liked raw vegetable among preschoolers with genetic sensitivity to bitterness. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3369	hiding vegetables to reduce energy density: an effective strategy to increase children's vegetable intake and reduce energy intake
med-3370	serving styles of raw snack vegetables. what do children want? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3371	hidden vegetables: an effective strategy to reduce energy intake and increase vegetable intake in adults
med-3372	associations of parenting styles, parental feeding practices and child characteristics with young children's fruit and vegetable consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3373	the influence of social involvement, neighborhood aesthetics, and community garden participation on fruit and vegetable consumption
med-3374	attractive names sustain increased vegetable intake in schools. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3375	classroom "cupcake" celebrations: observations of foods offered and consumed. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3376	"split them!" smaller item sizes of cookies lead to a decrease in energy intake in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3377	offering “dip” promotes intake of a moderately-liked raw vegetable among preschoolers with genetic sensitivity to bitterness. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3378	brain cancer associated with environmental lead exposure: evidence from implementation of a national petrol-lead phase-out program (plpop) in taiwa... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3379	the urban rise and fall of air lead (pb) and the latent surge and retreat of societal violence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3380	artificial food dyes and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3381	synthetic food colors and neurobehavioral hazards: the view from environmental health research
med-3382	dietary sensitivities and adhd symptoms: thirty-five years of research. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3383	the effects of physical activity on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder symptoms: the evidence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3384	trends of outpatient prescription drug utilization in us children, 2002-2010. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3385	popcorn-worker lung caused by corporate and regulatory negligence: an avoidable tragedy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3386	bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (boop) after thoracic radiotherapy for breast carcinoma
med-3387	bronchiolitis obliterans and consumer exposure to butter-flavored microwave popcorn: a case series. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3388	mediterranean diet improves sexual function in women with the metabolic syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3389	the link between erectile and cardiovascular health: the canary in the coal mine. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3390	lifestyle/dietary recommendations for erectile dysfunction and female sexual dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3391	safety of sildenafil citrate: review of 67 double-blind placebo-controlled trials and the postmarketing safety database
med-3392	mediterranean diet improves erectile function in subjects with the metabolic syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3393	erectile dysfunction and risk of cardiovascular disease: meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3394	risk factors for mortality in the nurses’ health study: a competing risks analysis
med-3395	the mediterranean diet is associated with a reduction in premature mortality among middle-aged adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3396	oral sildenafil citrate (viagra) for erectile dysfunction: a systematic review and meta-analysis of harms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3397	are phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors associated with vision-threatening adverse events? a critical analysis and review of the literature. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3398	total cholesterol and high density lipoprotein cholesterol as important predictors of erectile dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3399	pistachio diet improves erectile function parameters and serum lipid profiles in patients with erectile dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3400	mediterranean diet improves sexual function in women with the metabolic syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3401	adherence to mediterranean diet and sexual function in women with type 2 diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3402	subclinical endothelial dysfunction and low-grade inflammation play roles in the development of erectile dysfunction in young men with low risk of ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3403	heart disease risk factors predict erectile dysfunction 25 years later: the rancho bernardo study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3404	subclinical coronary artery atherosclerosis in patients with erectile dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3405	the link between erectile and cardiovascular health: the canary in the coal mine. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3406	erectile dysfunction prevalence, time of onset and association with risk factors in 300 consecutive patients with acute chest pain and angiographic... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3407	the princeton iii consensus recommendations for the management of erectile dysfunction and cardiovascular disease
med-3408	lifestyle/dietary recommendations for erectile dysfunction and female sexual dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3409	the effect of lifestyle modification and cardiovascular risk factor reduction on erectile dysfunction: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3410	mediterranean diet improves erectile function in subjects with the metabolic syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3411	erectile dysfunction and risk of cardiovascular disease: meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3412	dietary factors, mediterranean diet and erectile dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3413	increased risk of stroke among men with erectile dysfunction: a nationwide population-based study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3414	how to save a life during a clinic visit for erectile dysfunction by modifying cardiovascular risk factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3415	penile doppler ultrasound in patients with erectile dysfunction (ed): role of peak systolic velocity measured in the flaccid state in predicting ar... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3416	the artery size hypothesis: a macrovascular link between erectile dysfunction and coronary artery disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3417	correlation between penile duplex findings and stress electrocardiography in men with erectile dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3418	erectile dysfunction and coronary disease: evaluating the link. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3419	cardiovascular mortality in men with erectile dysfunction: increased risk but not inevitable. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3420	erectile dysfunction and mortality
med-3421	male sexuality and cardiovascular risk. a cohort study in patients with erectile dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3422	mediterranean diet improves sexual function in women with the metabolic syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3423	adherence to mediterranean diet and sexual function in women with type 2 diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3424	subclinical endothelial dysfunction and low-grade inflammation play roles in the development of erectile dysfunction in young men with low risk of ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3425	heart disease risk factors predict erectile dysfunction 25 years later: the rancho bernardo study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3426	subclinical coronary artery atherosclerosis in patients with erectile dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3427	the link between erectile and cardiovascular health: the canary in the coal mine. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3428	erectile dysfunction prevalence, time of onset and association with risk factors in 300 consecutive patients with acute chest pain and angiographic... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3429	lifestyle/dietary recommendations for erectile dysfunction and female sexual dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3430	the effect of lifestyle modification and cardiovascular risk factor reduction on erectile dysfunction: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3431	a population-based, longitudinal study of erectile dysfunction and future coronary artery disease
med-3432	mediterranean diet improves erectile function in subjects with the metabolic syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3433	erectile dysfunction and risk of cardiovascular disease: meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3434	dietary factors, mediterranean diet and erectile dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3435	increased risk of stroke among men with erectile dysfunction: a nationwide population-based study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3436	how to save a life during a clinic visit for erectile dysfunction by modifying cardiovascular risk factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3437	penile doppler ultrasound in patients with erectile dysfunction (ed): role of peak systolic velocity measured in the flaccid state in predicting ar... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3438	the artery size hypothesis: a macrovascular link between erectile dysfunction and coronary artery disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3439	erectile dysfunction and coronary disease: evaluating the link. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3440	cardiovascular mortality in men with erectile dysfunction: increased risk but not inevitable. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3441	marine edible algae as disease preventers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3442	a case-control study on seaweed consumption and the risk of breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3443	could dietary seaweed reverse the metabolic syndrome? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3444	iodine and thyroid cancer risk among women in a multiethnic population: the bay area thyroid cancer study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3445	an epidemiologic study of thyroid cancer in hawaii. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3446	dietary seaweed modifies estrogen and phytoestrogen metabolism in healthy postmenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3447	seaweed prevents breast cancer? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3448	seaweed consumption and the risk of thyroid cancer in women: the japan public health center-based prospective study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3449	antigenotoxic activity of watercress extract in an in vitro mammalian system using comet assay. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3450	exercise-induced oxidative stress:myths, realities and physiological relevance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3451	could a vegetarian diet reduce exercise-induced oxidative stress? a review of the literature. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3452	fostering antioxidant defences: up-regulation of antioxidant genes or antioxidant supplementation? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3453	supplementation with vitamin c and n-acetyl-cysteine increases oxidative stress in humans after an acute muscle injury induced by eccentric exercise. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3454	endurance exercise results in dna damage as detected by the comet assay. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3455	exercise-induced lipid peroxidation: implications for deoxyribonucleic acid damage and systemic free radical generation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3456	acute and chronic watercress supplementation attenuates exercise-induced peripheral mononuclear cell dna damage and lipid peroxidation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3457	oxidative dna damage in human peripheral leukocytes induced by massive aerobic exercise. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3458	does physical activity induce dna damage? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3459	whole-body vibration and the prevention and treatment of delayed-onset muscle soreness
med-3460	massage therapy attenuates inflammatory signaling after exercise-induced muscle damage. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3461	acute inflammation: the underlying mechanism in delayed onset muscle soreness? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3462	muscle soreness and delayed-onset muscle soreness. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3463	efficacy of a tart cherry juice blend in preventing the symptoms of muscle damage
med-3464	consumption of bing sweet cherries lowers circulating concentrations of inflammation markers in healthy men and women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3465	effect of blueberry ingestion on natural killer cell counts, oxidative stress, and inflammation prior to and after 2.5 h of running. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3466	influence of tart cherry juice on indices of recovery following marathon running. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3467	antioxidant diet supplementation enhances aerobic performance in amateur sportsmen. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3468	orange juice improved lipid profile and blood lactate of overweight middle-aged women subjected to aerobic training. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3469	postprandial glycemic response to orange juice and nondiet cola: is there a difference? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3470	pancreatic lipase inhibitors from natural sources: unexplored potential. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3471	hdl-cholesterol-raising effect of orange juice in subjects with hypercholesterolemia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3472	role of hesperetin (a natural flavonoid) and its analogue on apoptosis in ht-29 human colon adenocarcinoma cell line--a comparative study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3473	orange juice improved lipid profile and blood lactate of overweight middle-aged women subjected to aerobic training. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3474	fruit and vegetable intake in relation to risk of ischemic stroke. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3475	effect of variety, processing, and storage on the flavonoid glycoside content and composition of lettuce and endive. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3476	controlling for sugar and ascorbic acid, a mixture of flavonoids matching navel oranges significantly increases human postprandial serum antioxidan... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3477	hesperidin contributes to the vascular protective effects of orange juice: a randomized crossover study in healthy volunteers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3478	role of hesperetin (a natural flavonoid) and its analogue on apoptosis in ht-29 human colon adenocarcinoma cell line--a comparative study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3479	bioavailability of orally administered water-dispersible hesperetin and its effect on peripheral vasodilatation in human subjects: implication of e... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3480	plant foods and the risk of cerebrovascular diseases: a potential protection of fruit consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3481	pancreatic lipase inhibitors from natural sources: unexplored potential. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3482	hesperidin displays relevant role in the nutrigenomic effect of orange juice on blood leukocytes in human volunteers: a randomized controlled cross-over study
med-3483	neuroprotective effects of citrus flavonoids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3484	flavonoids and cancer prevention: a review of the evidence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3485	phytonutrient intake by adults in the united states in relation to fruit and vegetable consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3486	united states pharmacopeia safety evaluation of spirulina. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3487	science of weight loss supplements: compromised by conflicts of interest?
med-3488	aloe-induced toxic hepatitis
med-3489	an herbal supplement containing ma huang-guarana for weight loss: a randomized, double-blind trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3490	science in liquid dietary supplement promotion: the misleading case of mangosteen juice
med-3491	hepatotoxicity due to hydroxycut®: a case series
med-3492	effects of a natural extract of (-)-hydroxycitric acid (hca-sx) and a combination of hca-sx plus niacin-bound chromium and gymnema sylvestre extrac... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3493	acute hepatotoxicity after ingestion of morinda citrifolia (noni berry) juice in a 14-year-old boy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3494	reducing the fat content in ground beef without sacrificing quality: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3495	exposure to common food additive carrageenan leads to reduced sulfatase activity and increase in sulfated glycosaminoglycans in human epithelial cells
med-3496	pro-inflammatory nf-κb and early growth response gene 1 regulate epithelial barrier disruption by food additive carrageenan in human intestinal epi... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3497	evaluation of certain food additives and contaminants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3498	dietary acrylamide exposure of the french population: results of the second french total diet study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3499	carrageenans and their use in meat products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3500	carrageenan induces cell cycle arrest in human intestinal epithelial cells in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3501	carrageenan induces interleukin-8 production through distinct bcl10 pathway in normal human colonic epithelial cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3502	review of harmful gastrointestinal effects of carrageenan in animal experiments.
med-3503	nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for primary dysmenorrhoea. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3504	surgical interruption of pelvic nerve pathways in dysmenorrhea: a systematic review of effectiveness. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3505	diet and sex-hormone binding globulin, dysmenorrhea, and premenstrual symptoms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3506	repetitive rectal painful distention induces rectal hypersensitivity in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3507	postinfectious functional gastrointestinal disorders. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3508	gastrointestinal infections and the development of irritable bowel syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3509	editorial: from the acute infection to the chronic disorder "don't worry it's just a viral gastroenteritis". - pubmed - ncbi
med-3510	a risk-benefit assessment of cisapride in the treatment of gastrointestinal disorders. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3511	the treatment of functional dyspepsia with red pepper. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3512	effect of red pepper on symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome: preliminary study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3513	altered rectal sensory response induced by balloon distention in patients with functional abdominal pain syndrome
med-3514	altered rectal perception is a biological marker of patients with irritable bowel syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3515	the role of nerve blocks and botulinum toxin injections in the management of cluster headaches. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3516	secretion, pain and sneezing induced by the application of capsaicin to the nasal mucosa in man.
med-3517	preventative effect of repeated nasal applications of capsaicin in cluster headache. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3518	melatonin in traditional mediterranean diets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3519	effect of tart cherry juice (prunus cerasus) on melatonin levels and enhanced sleep quality. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3520	no influence of melatonin on cerebral blood flow in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3521	sweet and sour cherry phenolics and their protective effects on neuronal cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3522	non-vertebrate melatonin. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3523	consumption of vegetables alters morning urinary 6-sulfatoxymelatonin concentration. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3524	diet promotes sleep duration and quality. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3525	normative data on the daily profile of urinary 6-sulfatoxymelatonin in healthy subjects between the ages of 20 and 84. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3526	jerte valley cherry-enriched diets improve nocturnal rest and increase 6-sulfatoxymelatonin and total antioxidant capacity in the urine of middle-a... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3527	melatonin for the prevention and treatment of jet lag. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3528	detection and quantification of the antioxidant melatonin in montmorency and balaton tart cherries (prunus cerasus). - pubmed - ncbi
med-3529	effect of kiwifruit consumption on sleep quality in adults with sleep problems. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3530	simultaneous analysis of serotonin, melatonin, piceid and resveratrol in fruits using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3531	antioxidant and antiinflammatory activities of anthocyanins and their aglycon, cyanidin, from tart cherries. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3532	application of lc and lc-ms to the analysis of melatonin and serotonin in edible plants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3533	effects of a tart cherry juice beverage on the sleep of older adults with insomnia: a pilot study
med-3534	efficacy of a tart cherry juice blend in preventing the symptoms of muscle damage
med-3535	cherries and health: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3536	epidemiology of insomnia: what we know and what we still need to learn. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3537	short or long sleep duration is associated with memory impairment in older chinese: the guangzhou biobank cohort study
med-3538	the cumulative cost of additional wakefulness: dose-response effects on neurobehavioral functions and sleep physiology from chronic sleep restricti... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3539	effect of kiwifruit consumption on sleep quality in adults with sleep problems. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3540	monoaminergic neurotransmission: the history of the discovery of antidepressants from 1950s until today. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3541	frequent consumption of vegetables predicts lower risk of depression in older taiwanese - results of a prospective population-based study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3542	monoamine oxidase inhibitors and the cheese effect. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3543	dietary inhibitors of monoamine oxidase a. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3544	contribution of monoamine oxidase (mao) inhibition to tobacco and alcohol addiction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3545	restriction of meat, fish, and poultry in omnivores improves mood: a pilot randomized controlled trial
med-3546	elevated monoamine oxidase a levels in the brain: an explanation for the monoamine imbalance of major depression. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3547	monoamine theories of depression: historical impact on biomedical research. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3548	flavonoids, a ubiquitous dietary phenolic subclass, exert extensive in vitro anti-invasive and in vivo anti-metastatic activities. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3549	fisetin inhibits various attributes of angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo--implications for angioprevention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3550	tumor angiogenesis as a target for dietary cancer prevention
med-3551	modulation of angiogenesis by dietary phytoconstituents in the prevention and intervention of breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3552	purple rice (oryza sativa l.) extract and its constituents inhibit vegf-induced angiogenesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3553	diet-derived polyphenols inhibit angiogenesis by modulating the interleukin-6/stat3 pathway. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3554	a wholly nutritional 'multifocal angiostatic therapy' for control of disseminated cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3555	phytochemicals and cancer risk: a review of the epidemiological evidence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3556	prevalence of hpv infection among females in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3557	vegetarian diets and the incidence of cancer in a low-risk population
med-3558	vitamin a, carotenoids, and risk of persistent oncogenic human papillomavirus infection. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3559	antioxidant-induced changes of the ap-1 transcription complex are paralleled by a selective suppression of human papillomavirus transcription.
med-3560	hpv-mediated cervical carcinogenesis: concepts and clinical implications. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3561	the sexually transmitted disease model for cervical cancer: incoherent epidemiologic findings and the role of misclassification of human papillomav... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3562	ct evaluation of cervical cancer: spectrum of disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3563	high prevalence of oncogenic hpv-16 in cervical smears of asymptomatic women of eastern uttar pradesh, india: a population-based study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3564	estimating changes in public health following implementation of hazard analysis and critical control point in the united states broiler slaughter i... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3565	ranking the disease burden of 14 pathogens in food sources in the united states using attribution data from outbreak investigations and expert elic... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3566	characterization of extended-spectrum cephalosporin-resistant salmonella enterica serovar heidelberg isolated from food animals, retail meat, and h... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3567	nonfatal bathroom injuries among persons aged ≥15 years--united states, 2008. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3568	the 2009 garrod lecture: the evolution of antimicrobial resistance: a darwinian perspective. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3569	mechanisms of antimicrobial resistance in bacteria. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3570	human papillomavirus is a necessary cause of invasive cervical cancer worldwide. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3571	mechanisms of antimicrobial resistance in bacteria. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3572	ancestral antibiotic resistance in mycobacterium tuberculosis
med-3573	food animals and antimicrobials: impacts on human health
med-3574	salmonella enterica serotype enteritidis: increasing incidence of domestically acquired infections. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3575	comparison of esbl contamination in organic and conventional retail chicken meat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3576	detection of a common and persistent tet(l)-carrying plasmid in chicken-waste-impacted farm soil
med-3577	surveillance for morbidity and mortality among older adults--united states, 1995-1996. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3578	comparison of the prevalences and antimicrobial resistances of escherichia coli isolates from different retail meats in the united states, 2002 to 2008
med-3579	application of bayesian techniques to model the burden of human salmonellosis attributable to u.s. food commodities at the point of processing: adaptation of a danish model
med-3580	second-meal effect: low-glycemic-index foods eaten at dinner improve subsequent breakfast glycemic response. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3581	colonic fermentation of indigestible carbohydrates contributes to the second-meal effect. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3582	slow release dietary carbohydrate improves second meal tolerance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3583	first and second meal effects of pulses on blood glucose, appetite, and food intake at a later meal. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3584	a higher ratio of beans to white rice is associated with lower cardiometabolic risk factors in costa rican adults
med-3585	the spermicidal potency of coca-cola and pepsi-cola. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3586	dietary fat and semen quality among men attending a fertility clinic
med-3587	the question of declining sperm density revisited: an analysis of 101 studies published 1934-1996.
med-3588	caffeinated and alcoholic beverage intake in relation to ovulatory disorder infertility
med-3589	food intake and its relationship with semen quality: a case-control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3590	male reproductive organs are at risk from environmental hazards
med-3591	perinatal exposure to low doses of dioxin can permanently impair human semen quality
med-3592	heavy metals in commercial fish in new jersey. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3593	correlation of lead, cadmium and mercury levels in tissue and liver samples with age in cattle. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3594	semen quality of fertile us males in relation to their mothers' beef consumption during pregnancy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3595	heavy metals and couple fecundity, the life study
med-3596	physical activity, obesity and eating habits can influence assisted reproduction outcomes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3597	trans fat consumption and aggression
med-3598	a prospective study of intake of trans-fatty acids from ruminant fat, partially hydrogenated vegetable oils, and marine oils and mortality from cvd. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3599	updated estimate of trans fat intake by the us population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3600	update on the biological effects of ionizing radiation, relative dose factors and radiation hygiene. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3601	children as guinea pigs: historical perspective. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3602	effects of ginger on motion sickness and gastric slow-wave dysrhythmias induced by circular vection. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3603	richard pearson strong and the iatrogenic plague disaster in bilibid prison, manila, 1906. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3604	us medical researchers, the nuremberg doctors trial, and the nuremberg code. a review of findings of the advisory committee on human radiation expe... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3605	evaluation of chromosomal aberrations, micronuclei, and sister chromatid exchanges in hospital workers chronically exposed to ionizing radiation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3606	radioprotective effects of zingiber officinale roscoe (ginger): past, present and future. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3607	radioprotection by plant products: present status and future prospects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3608	oxidative stress in radiology staff. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3609	protective effect of zingerone, a dietary compound against radiation induced genetic damage and apoptosis in human lymphocytes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3610	effects of melissa officinalis l. on oxidative status and dna damage in subjects exposed to long-term low-dose ionizing radiation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3611	high dietary antioxidant intakes are associated with decreased chromosome translocation frequency in airline pilots
med-3612	the use of dental radiographs: update and recommendations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3613	dietary factors and cancer mortality among atomic-bomb survivors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3614	dental x-rays and risk of meningioma
med-3615	evaluation of chromosomal aberrations, micronuclei, and sister chromatid exchanges in hospital workers chronically exposed to ionizing radiation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3616	dietary and clastogenic factors in children who immigrated to israel from regions contaminated by the chernobyl accident. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3617	high dietary antioxidant intakes are associated with decreased chromosome translocation frequency in airline pilots
med-3618	the use of dental radiographs: update and recommendations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3619	update on the biological effects of ionizing radiation, relative dose factors and radiation hygiene. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3620	dietary factors and cancer mortality among atomic-bomb survivors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3621	dental x-rays and risk of meningioma
med-3622	dietary and clastogenic factors in children who immigrated to israel from regions contaminated by the chernobyl accident. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3623	pediatric ct research elevates public health concerns: low-dose radiation issues are highly politicized. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3624	estimated risks of radiation-induced fatal cancer from pediatric ct. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3625	informed consent and communication of risk from radiological and nuclear medicine examinations: how to escape from a communication inferno
med-3626	justification of diagnostic medical exposures: some practical issues. report of an international atomic energy agency consultation
med-3627	projected cancer risks from computed tomographic scans performed in the united states in 2007. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3628	210po in the marine environment with emphasis on its behaviour within the biosphere. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3629	pacific bluefin tuna transport fukushima-derived radionuclides from japan to california
med-3630	radioactive fallout in the united states due to the fukushima nuclear plant accident. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3631	increase of 210po levels in human semen fluid after mussel ingestion. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3632	an unexpected mortality increase in the united states follows arrival of the radioactive plume from fukushima: is there a correlation? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3633	semen quality of male idiopathic infertile smokers and nonsmokers: an ultrastructural study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3634	cigarette smoke radioactivity and lung cancer risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3635	wet deposition of fission-product isotopes to north america from the fukushima dai-ichi incident, march 2011. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3636	death by polonium-210: lessons learned from the murder of former soviet spy alexander litvinenko. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3637	antimicrobial traits of tea- and cranberry-derived polyphenols against streptococcus mutans
med-3638	susceptibility of helicobacter pylori isolates to the antiadhesion activity of a high-molecular-weight constituent of cranberry. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3639	differences in microbiological composition of saliva and dental plaque in subjects with different drinking habits. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3640	novel anti-microbial therapies for dental plaque-related diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3641	inhibitory effects of cranberry juice on attachment of oral streptococci and biofilm formation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3642	inhibition of bacterial adherence by cranberry juice: potential use for the treatment of urinary tract infections. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3643	oral consumption of cranberry juice cocktail inhibits molecular-scale adhesion of clinical uropathogenic escherichia coli
med-3644	cranberries for preventing urinary tract infections. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3645	cranberry or trimethoprim for the prevention of recurrent urinary tract infections? a randomized controlled trial in older women
med-3646	cranberries vs antibiotics to prevent urinary tract infections: a randomized double-blind noninferiority trial in premenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3647	chicken as reservoir for extraintestinal pathogenic escherichia coli in humans, canada
med-3648	genetic evidence supporting the fecal-perineal-urethral hypothesis in cystitis caused by escherichia coli. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3649	food-borne origins of escherichia coli causing extraintestinal infections. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3650	is escherichia coli urinary tract infection a zoonosis? proof of direct link with production animals and meat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3651	the effectiveness of hygiene procedures for prevention of cross-contamination from chicken carcases in the domestic kitchen. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3652	multidrug-resistant extraintestinal pathogenic escherichia coli of sequence type st131 in animals and foods. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3653	chicken as reservoir for extraintestinal pathogenic escherichia coli in humans, canada
med-3654	nutrient profiling of foods: creating a nutrient-rich food index. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3655	the prevalence of bacterial vaginosis in the united states, 2001-2004; associations with symptoms, sexual behaviors, and reproductive health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3656	a longitudinal study of vaginal douching and bacterial vaginosis—a marginal structural modeling analysis
med-3657	bacterial vaginosis is associated with variation in dietary indices
med-3658	triptans (serotonin, 5-ht1b/1d agonists) in migraine: detailed results and methods of a meta-analysis of 53 trials. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3659	results of patch testing with lavender oil in japan. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3660	lavender essential oil in the treatment of migraine headache: a placebo-controlled clinical trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3661	an introduction to migraine: from ancient treatment to functional pharmacology and antimigraine therapy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3662	biological activities of lavender essential oil. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3663	treatment of migraine: update on new therapies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3664	a randomized, placebo-controlled trial of acetaminophen for treatment of migraine headache. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3665	sensing an improvement: an experimental study to evaluate the use of aromatherapy, massage and periods of rest in an intensive care unit. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3666	prepubertal gynecomastia linked to lavender and tea tree oils. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3667	genotoxicity of lavender oil, linalyl acetate, and linalool on human lymphocytes in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3668	the effects of lavender oil inhalation on emotional states, autonomic nervous system, and brain electrical activity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3669	aromatherapy positively affects mood, eeg patterns of alertness and math computations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3670	a multi-center, double-blind, randomised study of the lavender oil preparation silexan in comparison to lorazepam for generalized anxiety disorder. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3671	investigating the role of perceived stress on bacterial flora activity and salivary cortisol secretion: a possible mechanism underlying susceptibil... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3672	99th dahlem conference on infection, inflammation and chronic inflammatory disorders: psycho-neuroimmunology and the intestinal microbiota: clinical observations and basic mechanisms
med-3673	gut inflammation in chronic fatigue syndrome
med-3674	gut feelings: the emerging biology of gut–brain communication
med-3675	a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study of a probiotic in emotional symptoms of chronic fatigue syndrome
med-3676	assessment of psychotropic-like properties of a probiotic formulation (lactobacillus helveticus r0052 and bifidobacterium longum r0175) in rats and... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3677	probiotics function mechanistically as delivery vehicles for neuroactive compounds: microbial endocrinology in the design and use of probiotics. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3678	mood and gut feelings. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3679	the impact of meals on a probiotic during transit through a model of the human upper gastrointestinal tract. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3680	probiotics for preventing acute upper respiratory tract infections. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3681	systemic immunity-enhancing effects in healthy subjects following dietary consumption of the lactic acid bacterium lactobacillus rhamnosus hn001. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3682	maternal vaginal microflora during pregnancy and the risk of asthma hospitalization and use of antiasthma medication in early childhood. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3683	randomised, double-blind and placebo-controlled study using new probiotic lactobacilli for strengthening the body immune defence against viral infe... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3684	microbiological evaluation of commercial probiotic products available in the usa in 2009. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3685	caesarean delivery and risk of atopy and allergic disease: meta-analyses. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3686	enhancement of immunity in the elderly by dietary supplementation with the probiotic bifidobacterium lactis hn019. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3687	novel probiotic candidates for humans isolated from raw fruits and vegetables. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3688	dose-response efficacy of a proprietary probiotic formula of lactobacillus acidophilus cl1285 and lactobacillus casei lbc80r for antibiotic-associa... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3689	standardized frozen preparation for transplantation of fecal microbiota for recurrent clostridium difficile infection. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3690	probiotics as prevention and treatment for diarrhea. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3691	probiotics, prebiotics infant formula use in preterm or low birth weight infants: a systematic review
med-3692	human gut microbiota and its relationship to health and disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3693	microbiological evaluation of commercial probiotic products available in the usa in 2009. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3694	recurrent clostridium difficile colitis: case series involving 18 patients treated with donor stool administered via a nasogastric tube. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3695	probiotics for the prevention of pediatric antibiotic-associated diarrhea. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3696	alcohol consumption and breast cancer risk in the women's health study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3697	healthy lifestyle on the risk of breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3698	greater survival after breast cancer in physically active women with high vegetable-fruit intake regardless of obesity
med-3699	is concordance with world cancer research fund/american institute for cancer research guidelines for cancer prevention related to subsequent risk o... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3700	red versus white wine as a nutritional aromatase inhibitor in premenopausal women: a pilot study
med-3701	anti-aromatase chemicals in red wine. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3702	the allergy epidemic extends beyond the past few decades. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3703	the association between allergies and cancer: what is currently known? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3704	pyrogallol, an active compound from the medicinal plant emblica officinalis, regulates expression of pro-inflammatory genes in bronchial epithelial... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3705	evolution of inflammatory diseases
med-3706	are autoimmune diseases predictable? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3707	dietary intake of agaricus bisporus white button mushroom accelerates salivary immunoglobulin a secretion in healthy volunteers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3708	is the asthma epidemic still ascending? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3709	immunity, inflammation, and allergy in the gut. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3710	quantitative assessment of the infection rate of the entomophthoraceous fungus, zoophthora anhuiensis against the green peach aphid myzus persicae. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3711	regulatory t-cell abnormalities and the global epidemic of immuno-inflammatory disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3712	chemical composition and nutritional value of the most widely appreciated cultivated mushrooms: an inter-species comparative study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3713	higher frequencies of cd161+ circulating t lymphocytes in allergic rhinitis patients compared to healthy donors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3714	differences in antioxidant levels of fresh, frozen and freeze-dried strawberries and strawberry jam. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3715	is oral sex really a dangerous carcinogen? let's take a closer look. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3716	effects of a topically applied bioadhesive berry gel on loss of heterozygosity indices in premalignant oral lesions
med-3717	oral sex, cancer and death: sexually transmitted cancers
med-3718	american cancer society guidelines on nutrition and physical activity for cancer prevention: reducing the risk of cancer with healthy food choices ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3719	formulation and in vitro-in vivo evaluation of black raspberry extract-loaded plga/pla injectable millicylindrical implants for sustained delivery of chemopreventive anthocyanins
med-3720	inhibition of the growth of premalignant and malignant human oral cell lines by extracts and components of black raspberries. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3721	topical application of a bioadhesive black raspberry gel modulates gene expression and reduces cyclooxygenase 2 protein in human premalignant oral lesions
med-3722	dietary patterns and the risk of esophageal cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3723	dietary patterns and risk of oesophageal cancers: a population-based case-control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3724	synergism from sequenced combinations of curcumin and epigallocatechin-3-gallate with cisplatin in the killing of human ovarian cancer cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3725	antioxidant and antiproliferative activities of common fruits. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3726	combinatorial strategies employing nutraceuticals for cancer development. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3727	dietary fat and meat intakes and risk of reflux esophagitis, barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma
med-3728	strawberry fields forever? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3729	role of antioxidants in cancer therapy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3730	randomized phase ii trial of lyophilized strawberries in patients with dysplastic precancerous lesions of the esophagus. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3731	esophageal cancer: epidemiology, pathogenesis and prevention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3732	rectal laterally spreading tumors successfully treated in two steps by endoscopic submucosal dissection and endoscopic mucosal resection
med-3733	glycemic responses to sweetened dried and raw cranberries in humans with type 2 diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3734	cranberries and cranberry products: powerful in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo sources of antioxidants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3735	antioxidant and antiproliferative activities of common fruits. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3736	total cranberry extract versus its phytochemical constituents: antiproliferative and synergistic effects against human tumor cell lines. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3737	habitual intake of flavonoid subclasses and incident hypertension in adults
med-3738	comparison of health-relevant flavonoids in commonly consumed cranberry products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3739	american cranberry (vaccinium macrocarpon) extract affects human prostate cancer cell growth via cell cycle arrest by modulating expression of cell... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3740	anthocyanin composition of wild bananas in thailand. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3741	cranberries: ripe for more cancer research? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3742	habitual intake of flavonoid subclasses and incident hypertension in adults
med-3743	anthocyanin composition of wild bananas in thailand. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3744	antioxidant and antiproliferative activities of common fruits. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3745	total cranberry extract versus its phytochemical constituents: antiproliferative and synergistic effects against human tumor cell lines. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3746	anthocyanins are bioavailable in humans following an acute dose of cranberry juice. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3747	american cranberry (vaccinium macrocarpon) extract affects human prostate cancer cell growth via cell cycle arrest by modulating expression of cell... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3748	cranberries: ripe for more cancer research? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3749	placebos in clinical practice: comparing attitudes, beliefs, and patterns of use between academic psychiatrists and nonpsychiatrists. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3750	bach flower remedies: a systematic review of randomised clinical trials. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3751	controlled trial of megestrol acetate for the treatment of cancer anorexia and cachexia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3752	questionnaire survey on use of placebo
med-3753	what's in placebos: who knows? analysis of randomized, controlled trials. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3754	a survey of placebo use in a general hospital. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3755	can deceiving patients be morally acceptable?
med-3756	placebos and general practice: attitudes to, and the use of, the placebo effect. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3757	a duty to deceive: placebos in clinical practice. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3758	a systematic review of systematic reviews of homeopathy
med-3759	prescribing “placebo treatments”: results of national survey of us internists and rheumatologists
med-3760	the use of placebo interventions in medical practice--a national questionnaire survey of danish clinicians. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3761	general practice consultations: is there any point in being positive?
med-3762	moderate alcohol consumption during adult life, drinking patterns, and breast cancer risk
med-3763	a single sip of a strong alcoholic beverage causes exposure to carcinogenic concentrations of acetaldehyde in the oral cavity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3764	salivary acetaldehyde increase due to alcohol-containing mouthwash use: a risk factor for oral cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3765	molecular mechanisms of alcohol-mediated carcinogenesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3766	epidemiology and pathophysiology of alcohol and breast cancer: update 2012. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3767	light alcohol drinking and cancer: a meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3768	the positive and negative health effects of alcohol- and the public health implications. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3769	energy density, nutrient adequacy, and cost per serving can provide insight into food choices in the lower mississippi delta. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3770	the cost of us foods as related to their nutritive value
med-3771	what is the cell hydration status of healthy children in the usa? preliminary data on urine osmolality and water intake. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3772	hydration and cognitive performance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3773	mild dehydration impairs cognitive performance and mood of men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3774	should children drink more water?: the effects of drinking water on cognition in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3775	effects of drinking supplementary water at school on cognitive performance in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3776	does having a drink help you think? 6-7-year-old children show improvements in cognitive performance from baseline to test after having a drink of ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3777	effect of flax seed ingestion on the menstrual cycle. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3778	vegetarian vs nonvegetarian diets, dietary restraint, and subclinical ovulatory disturbances: prospective 6-mo study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3779	vegetarianism and menstrual cycle disturbances: is there an association? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3780	gut flora metabolism of phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease
med-3781	detection of increased choline compounds with proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy subsequent to malignant transformation of human prosta... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3782	egg, red meat, and poultry intake and risk of lethal prostate cancer in the prostate specific antigen-era: incidence and survival
med-3783	fish odour syndrome
med-3784	choline and betaine intake and the risk of colorectal cancer in men
med-3785	one-carbon metabolism and prostate cancer risk: prospective investigation of seven circulating b vitamins and metabolites. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3786	choline- and betaine-defined diets for use in clinical research and for the management of trimethylaminuria. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3787	11c-choline vs. 18f-fdg pet/ct in assessing bone involvement in patients with multiple myeloma
med-3788	intestinal microbiota metabolism of l-carnitine, a nutrient in red meat, promotes atherosclerosis
med-3789	choline intake and risk of lethal prostate cancer: incidence and survival
med-3790	intakes of meat, fish, poultry, and eggs and risk of prostate cancer progression
med-3791	recommendations for the prevention of chronic disease: the application for breast disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3792	serum prolactin and oestradiol levels in women with cyclical mastalgia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3793	global study of women's experiences of premenstrual symptoms and their effects on daily life. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3794	diet and sex-hormone binding globulin, dysmenorrhea, and premenstrual symptoms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3795	mastalgia: a review of management. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3796	effect of flax seed ingestion on the menstrual cycle. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3797	a double blind trial of the prolactin inhibitor bromocriptine in painful benign breast disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3798	influence of dietary fat on self-reported menstrual symptoms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3799	low-fat dietary pattern and risk of benign proliferative breast disease: a randomized, controlled dietary modification trial
med-3800	mastalgia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3801	effect of a low-fat high-carbohydrate diet on symptoms of cyclical mastopathy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3802	fresh aromatic herbs containing methylchavicol did not exhibit the pro-oxidative effects of pure methylchavicol on a human hepatoma cell line, hepg2. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3803	artemisia dracunculus l. (tarragon): a critical review of its traditional use, chemical composition, pharmacology, and safety. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3804	risk assessment of consumption of methylchavicol and tarragon: the genotoxic potential in vivo and in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3805	toxicological and mutagenic analysis of artemisia dracunculus (tarragon) extract. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3806	toxicology of nutmeg abuse. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3807	artemisia dracunculus l. (tarragon): a critical review of its traditional use, chemical composition, pharmacology, and safety. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3808	risk assessment of consumption of methylchavicol and tarragon: the genotoxic potential in vivo and in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3809	toxicological and mutagenic analysis of artemisia dracunculus (tarragon) extract. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3810	christmas gingerbread (lebkuchen) and christmas cheer--review of the potential role of mood elevating amphetamine-like compounds formed in vivo and... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3811	cinnamon intake lowers fasting blood glucose: meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3812	effects of short-term cinnamon ingestion on in vivo glucose tolerance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3813	changes in glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity following 2 weeks of daily cinnamon ingestion in healthy humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3814	usefulness of vegetarian and vegan diets for treating type 2 diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3815	vegetarian diet improves insulin resistance and oxidative stress markers more than conventional diet in subjects with type 2 diabetes
med-3816	in vitro and in vivo efficacy of sulfo-carrabiose, a sugar-based cosmetic ingredient with anti-cellulite properties. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3817	dietary polyamine intake and risk of colorectal adenomatous polyps
med-3818	adiponectin expression in subcutaneous adipose tissue is reduced in women with cellulite. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3819	postprandial plasma adiponectin decreases after glucose and high fat meal and is independently associated with postprandial triacylglycerols but no... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3820	meal modulation of circulating interleukin 18 and adiponectin concentrations in healthy subjects and in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3821	development of a polyamine database for assessing dietary intake
med-3822	cellulite: nature and aetiopathogenesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3823	reduction in ki-67 in benign breast tissue of high risk women with the lignan secoisolariciresinol diglycoside (sdg)
med-3824	do phytoestrogens reduce the risk of breast cancer and breast cancer recurrence? what clinicians need to know. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3825	antiproliferative activity of lignans against the breast carcinoma cell lines mcf 7 and bt 20. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3826	dietary flaxseed alters tumor biological markers in postmenopausal breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3827	serum enterolactone and prognosis of postmenopausal breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3828	serum enterolactone levels and mortality outcome in women with early breast cancer: a retrospective cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3829	meta-analyses of lignans and enterolignans in relation to breast cancer risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3830	dietary lignan intakes in relation to survival among women with breast cancer: the western new york exposures and breast cancer (web) study
med-3831	tamoxifen and flaxseed alter angiogenesis regulators in normal human breast tissue in vivo
med-3832	do phytoestrogens reduce the risk of breast cancer and breast cancer recurrence? what clinicians need to know. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3833	reduction in ki-67 in benign breast tissue of high risk women with the lignan secoisolariciresinol diglycoside (sdg)
med-3834	dietary lignan intakes in relation to survival among women with breast cancer: the western new york exposures and breast cancer (web) study
med-3835	antiproliferative activity of lignans against the breast carcinoma cell lines mcf 7 and bt 20. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3836	dietary flaxseed alters tumor biological markers in postmenopausal breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3837	serum enterolactone and prognosis of postmenopausal breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3838	serum enterolactone levels and mortality outcome in women with early breast cancer: a retrospective cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3839	meta-analyses of lignans and enterolignans in relation to breast cancer risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3840	tamoxifen and flaxseed alter angiogenesis regulators in normal human breast tissue in vivo
med-3841	reduction in ki-67 in benign breast tissue of high risk women with the lignan secoisolariciresinol diglycoside (sdg)
med-3842	whole sesame seed is as rich a source of mammalian lignan precursors as whole flaxseed. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3843	antiproliferative activity of lignans against the breast carcinoma cell lines mcf 7 and bt 20. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3844	does antibacterial treatment for urinary tract infection contribute to the risk of breast cancer?
med-3845	serum enterolactone levels and mortality outcome in women with early breast cancer: a retrospective cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3846	high-performance liquid chromatographic analysis of secoisolariciresinol diglucoside and hydroxycinnamic acid glucosides in flaxseed by alkaline ex... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3847	lignans in man and in animal species. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3848	meta-analyses of lignans and enterolignans in relation to breast cancer risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3849	role of dietary lignans in the reduction of breast cancer risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3850	excretion, isolation and structure of a new phenolic constituent of female urine. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3851	dietary fiber and breast cancer risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3852	determination of urinary lignans and phytoestrogen metabolites, potential antiestrogens and anticarcinogens, in urine of women on various habitual ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3853	serum enterolactone and prognosis of postmenopausal breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3854	phytoestrogen consumption and association with breast, prostate and colorectal cancer in epic norfolk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3855	estimated enterolignans, lignan-rich foods, and fibre in relation to survival after postmenopausal breast cancer
med-3856	hypothesis: is antibiotic use associated with breast cancer? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3857	enterolactone and breast cancer: methodological issues may contribute to conflicting results in observational studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3858	dietary fiber intake and risk of breast cancer: a meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3859	dietary fiber and breast cancer risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3860	dietary fiber intake and risk of breast cancer by menopausal and estrogen receptor status
med-3861	a vegetarian dietary pattern as a nutrient-dense approach to weight management: an analysis of the national health and nutrition examination survey... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3862	dietary factors and risk of breast cancer: combined analysis of 12 case-control studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3863	sensitive skin: closing in on a physiological cause. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3864	supplementation of flaxseed oil diminishes skin sensitivity and improves skin barrier function and condition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3865	sensitive skin in the american population: prevalence, clinical data, and role of the dermatologist. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3866	flaxseed supplementation improved insulin resistance in obese glucose intolerant people: a randomized crossover design
med-3867	high alpha-linolenic acid flaxseed (linum usitatissimum): some nutritional properties in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3868	dietary milled flaxseed and flaxseed oil improve n-3 fatty acid status and do not affect glycemic control in individuals with well-controlled type ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3869	an open-label study on the effect of flax seed powder (linum usitatissimum) supplementation in the management of diabetes mellitus. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3870	lignans and isoflavonoids in plasma and prostatic fluid in men: samples from portugal, hong kong, and the united kingdom. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3871	pilot study to explore effects of low-fat, flaxseed-supplemented diet on proliferation of benign prostatic epithelium and prostate-specific antigen. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3872	flaxseed supplementation (not dietary fat restriction) reduces prostate cancer proliferation rates in men presurgery
med-3873	effect of low-fat diets on plasma levels of nfκb-regulated inflammatory cytokines and angiogenic factors in men with prostate cancer
med-3874	flaxseed supplementation (not dietary fat restriction) reduces prostate cancer proliferation rates in men presurgery
med-3875	effect of mammalian lignans on the growth of prostate cancer cell lines. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3876	lignans and isoflavonoids in plasma and prostatic fluid in men: samples from portugal, hong kong, and the united kingdom. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3877	pilot study to explore effects of low-fat, flaxseed-supplemented diet on proliferation of benign prostatic epithelium and prostate-specific antigen. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3878	effect of low-fat diets on plasma levels of nfκb-regulated inflammatory cytokines and angiogenic factors in men with prostate cancer
med-3879	pilot study of dietary fat restriction and flaxseed supplementation in men with prostate cancer before surgery: exploring the effects on hormonal l... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3880	estimating changes in public health following implementation of hazard analysis and critical control point in the united states broiler slaughter i... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3881	ranking the disease burden of 14 pathogens in food sources in the united states using attribution data from outbreak investigations and expert elic... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3882	characterization of extended-spectrum cephalosporin-resistant salmonella enterica serovar heidelberg isolated from food animals, retail meat, and h... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3883	vital signs: incidence and trends of infection with pathogens transmitted commonly through food--foodborne diseases active surveillance network, 10... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3884	the 2009 garrod lecture: the evolution of antimicrobial resistance: a darwinian perspective. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3885	mechanisms of antimicrobial resistance in bacteria. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3886	mechanisms of antimicrobial resistance in bacteria. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3887	food animals and antimicrobials: impacts on human health
med-3888	salmonella enterica serotype enteritidis: increasing incidence of domestically acquired infections. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3889	comparison of esbl contamination in organic and conventional retail chicken meat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3890	detection of a common and persistent tet(l)-carrying plasmid in chicken-waste-impacted farm soil
med-3891	comparison of the prevalences and antimicrobial resistances of escherichia coli isolates from different retail meats in the united states, 2002 to 2008
med-3892	application of bayesian techniques to model the burden of human salmonellosis attributable to u.s. food commodities at the point of processing: adaptation of a danish model
med-3893	reversal of fatigue during prolonged exercise by carbohydrate infusion or ingestion. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3894	sun-dried raisins are a cost-effective alternative to sports jelly beans in prolonged cycling. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3895	metabolic and performance effects of raisins versus sports gel as pre-exercise feedings in cyclists. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3896	the effect of the addition of daily fruit and nut bars to diet on weight, and cardiac risk profile, in overweight adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3897	glycemic indices of five varieties of dates in healthy and diabetic subjects
med-3898	date fruits (phoenix dactylifera linn): an emerging medicinal food. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3899	daily apple versus dried plum: impact on cardiovascular disease risk factors in postmenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3900	dried fruit consumption is associated with improved diet quality and reduced obesity in us adults: national health and nutrition examination survey... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3901	nut consumption is associated with decreased health risk factors for cardiovascular disease and metabolic syndrome in u.s. adults: nhanes 1999-2004. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3902	effect of consumption of dried california mission figs on lipid concentrations
med-3903	effects of date ( phoenix dactylifera l., medjool or hallawi variety) consumption by healthy subjects on serum glucose and lipid levels and on seru... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3904	randomised clinical trial: dried plums (prunes) vs. psyllium for constipation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3905	nutrition and lifestyle in relation to bowel movement frequency: a cross-sectional study of 20630 men and women in epic-oxford. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3906	date fruits (phoenix dactylifera linn): an emerging medicinal food. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3907	glycemic indices of five varieties of dates in healthy and diabetic subjects
med-3908	daily apple versus dried plum: impact on cardiovascular disease risk factors in postmenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3909	effects of date ( phoenix dactylifera l., medjool or hallawi variety) consumption by healthy subjects on serum glucose and lipid levels and on seru... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3910	effect of consumption of dried california mission figs on lipid concentrations
med-3911	herbal infusions as a source of calcium, magnesium, iron, zinc and copper in human nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3912	the influence of aspalathus linearis (rooibos) and dihydrochalcones on adrenal steroidogenesis: quantification of steroid intermediates and end pro... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3913	acute neurocognitive effects of epigallocatechin gallate (egcg). - pubmed - ncbi
med-3914	consumption of hibiscus sabdariffa l. aqueous extract and its impact on systemic antioxidant potential in healthy subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3915	bioavailability study of a polyphenol-enriched extract from hibiscus sabdariffa in rats and associated antioxidant status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3916	mechanism of action of stinging nettles. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3917	urtica dioica for treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia: a prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3918	herbal infusions as a source of calcium, magnesium, iron, zinc and copper in human nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3919	the influence of aspalathus linearis (rooibos) and dihydrochalcones on adrenal steroidogenesis: quantification of steroid intermediates and end pro... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3920	acute neurocognitive effects of epigallocatechin gallate (egcg). - pubmed - ncbi
med-3921	consumption of hibiscus sabdariffa l. aqueous extract and its impact on systemic antioxidant potential in healthy subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3922	bioavailability study of a polyphenol-enriched extract from hibiscus sabdariffa in rats and associated antioxidant status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3923	mechanism of action of stinging nettles. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3924	urtica dioica for treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia: a prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3925	a diet low in animal fat and rich in n-hexacosanol and fisetin is effective in reducing symptoms of parkinson's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3926	protein redistribution diet and antiparkinsonian response to levodopa. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3927	caffeine for treatment of parkinson disease
med-3928	plasma levels of amino acids correlate with motor fluctuations in parkinsonism. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3929	habitual intake of dietary flavonoids and risk of parkinson disease
med-3930	intake of japanese and chinese teas reduces risk of parkinson's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3931	pilot dietary study with normoproteic protein-redistributed plant-food diet and motor performance in patients with parkinson's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3932	caffeine and risk of parkinson disease in a large cohort of men and women
med-3933	clinical and pharmacokinetic effects of a diet rich in insoluble fiber on parkinson disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3934	impact of adopting a vegan diet or an olestra supplementation on plasma organochlorine concentrations: results from two pilot studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3935	meeting report: consensus statement—parkinson’s disease and the environment: collaborative on health and the environment and parkinson’s action network (che pan) conference 26–28 june 2007
med-3936	elevated serum pesticide levels and risk of parkinson disease
med-3937	traumatic brain injuries in illustrated literature: experience from a series of over 700 head injuries in the asterix comic books. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3938	association between polychlorinated biphenyls and parkinson’s disease neuropathology
med-3939	hospital admissions for traumatic brain injuries, 2004: statistical brief #27 - pubmed - ncbi
med-3940	lewy pathology is not the first sign of degeneration in vulnerable neurons in parkinson disease
med-3941	açai (euterpe oleracea mart.) polyphenolics in their glycoside and aglycone forms induce apoptosis of hl-60 leukemia cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3942	effects of açai (euterpe oleracea mart.) berry preparation on metabolic parameters in a healthy overweight population: a pilot study
med-3943	absence of pomegranate ellagitannins in the majority of commercial pomegranate extracts: implications for standardization and quality control. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3944	pain reduction and improvement in range of motion after daily consumption of an açai (euterpe oleracea mart.) pulp–fortified polyphenolic-rich fruit and berry juice blend
med-3945	international multidimensional authenticity specification (imas) algorithm for detection of commercial pomegranate juice adulteration. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3946	antioxidant capacity and other bioactivities of the freeze-dried amazonian palm berry, euterpe oleraceae mart. (acai). - pubmed - ncbi
med-3947	hibiscus anthocyanins rich extract-induced apoptotic cell death in human promyelocytic leukemia cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3948	addition of açaí (euterpe oleracea) to cigarettes has a protective effect against emphysema in mice. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3949	characterization of the continuous, differentiating myeloid cell line (hl-60) from a patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3950	polysaccharides isolated from açaí fruit induce innate immune responses
med-3951	rhabdomyolysis associated with the use of a mislabeled "acai berry" dietary supplement. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3952	polyphenolics from açaí ( euterpe oleracea mart.) and red muscadine grape (vitis rotundifolia ) protect human umbilical vascular endothelial cell... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3953	an evidence-based systematic review of acai (euterpe oleracea) by the natural standard research collaboration. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3954	does childhood meat eating contribute to sex differences in risk factors for ischaemic heart disease in a developing population? - pubmed - ncbi
med-3955	serum pbdes and age at menarche in adolescent girls: analysis of the national health and nutrition examination survey 2003–2004
med-3956	beyond overweight: nutrition as an important lifestyle factor influencing timing of puberty. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3957	diet throughout childhood and age at menarche in a contemporary cohort of british girls. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3958	internal exposure to pollutants and sexual maturation in flemish adolescents. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3959	higher levels of igf-i and adrenal androgens at age 8 years are associated with earlier age at menarche in girls
med-3960	dietary microparticles and their impact on tolerance and immune responsiveness of the gastrointestinal tract
med-3961	lack of efficacy of a reduced microparticle diet in a multi-centred trial of patients with active crohn's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3962	biocompatibility of micro- and nano-particles in the colon. part ii. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3963	dietary sources of inorganic microparticles and their intake in healthy subjects and patients with crohn's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3964	diet and risk of inflammatory bowel disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3965	efficacy and tolerability of a low microparticle diet in a double blind, randomized, pilot study in crohn's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3966	fine and ultrafine particles of the diet: influence on the mucosal immune response and association with crohn's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3967	dietary microparticles implicated in crohn's disease can impair macrophage phagocytic activity and act as adjuvants in the presence of bacterial st... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3968	origin and fate of dietary nanoparticles and microparticles in the gastrointestinal tract. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3969	titanium dioxide nanoparticles in food and personal care products
med-3970	immune potentiation of ultrafine dietary particles in normal subjects and patients with inflammatory bowel disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3971	povidone iodine-induced overt hypothyroidism in a patient with prolonged habitual gargling: urinary excretion of iodine after gargling in normal su... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3972	prevention of upper respiratory tract infections by gargling: a randomized trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3973	gargling for oral hygiene and the development of fever in childhood: a population study in japan
med-3974	the economic burden of non-influenza-related viral respiratory tract infection in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3975	cost-effectiveness of gargling for the prevention of upper respiratory tract infections
med-3976	respiratory tract illnesses during the first year of life: effect of dog and cat contacts. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3977	survival following an acute coronary syndrome: a pet theory put to the test. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3978	does dog or cat ownership lead to increased gastroenteritis in young children in south australia?
med-3979	history of respiratory infections in the first 12 yr among children from a birth cohort. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3980	to have or not to have a pet for better health?
med-3981	factors associated with acute respiratory illness in day care children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3982	pet ownership and risk factors for cardiovascular disease: another look. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3983	molecular epidemiology of rabies virus in vietnam (2006-2009). - pubmed - ncbi
med-3984	molecular epidemiology of rabies in southern people’s republic of china
med-3985	vitamin d deficiency treated by consuming uvb-irradiated mushrooms
med-3986	bioavailability of vitamin d₂ from uv-b-irradiated button mushrooms in healthy adults deficient in serum 25-hydroxyvitamin d: a randomized controll... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3987	comparison of vitamin d2 and vitamin d3 supplementation in raising serum 25-hydroxyvitamin d status: a systematic review and meta-analysis
med-3988	vitamin d2 is as effective as vitamin d3 in maintaining circulating concentrations of 25-hydroxyvitamin d
med-3989	vitamin d and sterol composition of 10 types of mushrooms from retail suppliers in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3990	vitamin d supplementation for prevention of mortality in adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3991	ergocalciferol from mushrooms or supplements consumed with a standard meal increases 25-hydroxyergocalciferol but decreases 25-hydroxycholecalcifer... - pubmed - ncbi
med-3992	coconut oil predicts a beneficial lipid profile in pre-menopausal women in the philippines
med-3993	effects of dietary coconut oil on the biochemical and anthropometric profiles of women presenting abdominal obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3994	effects of dietary coconut oil, butter and safflower oil on plasma lipids, lipoproteins and lathosterol levels. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3995	effect of the fat composition of a single high-fat meal on inflammatory markers in healthy young women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-3996	study of the ketogenic agent ac-1202 in mild to moderate alzheimer's disease: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial
med-3997	an open-label pilot study to assess the efficacy and safety of virgin coconut oil in reducing visceral adiposity
med-3998	coconut oil enhances tomato carotenoid tissue accumulation compared to safflower oil in the mongolian gerbil ( meriones unguiculatus ). - pubmed - ncbi
med-3999	diets high in palmitic acid (16:0), lauric and myristic acids (12:0 + 14:0), or oleic acid (18:1) do not alter postprandial or fasting plasma homoc... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4000	coconut oil predicts a beneficial lipid profile in pre-menopausal women in the philippines
med-4001	an open-label pilot study to assess the efficacy and safety of virgin coconut oil in reducing visceral adiposity
med-4002	effects of dietary coconut oil on the biochemical and anthropometric profiles of women presenting abdominal obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4003	effects of dietary coconut oil, butter and safflower oil on plasma lipids, lipoproteins and lathosterol levels. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4004	coconut oil enhances tomato carotenoid tissue accumulation compared to safflower oil in the mongolian gerbil ( meriones unguiculatus ). - pubmed - ncbi
med-4005	effect of the fat composition of a single high-fat meal on inflammatory markers in healthy young women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4006	diets high in palmitic acid (16:0), lauric and myristic acids (12:0 + 14:0), or oleic acid (18:1) do not alter postprandial or fasting plasma homoc... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4007	study of the ketogenic agent ac-1202 in mild to moderate alzheimer's disease: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial
med-4008	association between chronic periodontitis and vasculogenic erectile dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4009	assessment of the influence of vegetarian diet on the occurrence of erosive and abrasive cavities in hard tooth tissues. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4010	dietary factors and oral and pharyngeal cancer risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4011	analysis of the erosive effect of different dietary substances and medications. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4012	comparison of the effects of whole and juiced fruits and vegetables on enamel demineralisation in situ. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4013	periodontal disease is associated with brachial artery endothelial dysfunction and systemic inflammation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4014	diet and prevention of oral cancer: strategies for clinical practice. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4015	association of serum ldl cholesterol level with periodontitis among patients visiting a tertiary-care hospital. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4016	oral implications of the vegan diet: observational study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4017	relationship between saturated fatty acids and periodontal disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4018	high-fiber foods reduce periodontal disease progression in men aged 65 and older: the veterans affairs normative aging study/dental longitudinal st... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4019	one-to-one dietary interventions undertaken in a dental setting to change dietary behaviour. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4020	brushing abrasion of softened and remineralised dentin: an in situ study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4021	diet, nutrition and the prevention of dental diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4022	association between chronic periodontitis and vasculogenic erectile dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4023	assessment of the influence of vegetarian diet on the occurrence of erosive and abrasive cavities in hard tooth tissues. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4024	dietary factors and oral and pharyngeal cancer risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4025	analysis of the erosive effect of different dietary substances and medications. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4026	is the consumption of fruit cariogenic? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4027	dietary behavior and knowledge of dental erosion among chinese adults
med-4028	dietary advice in dental practice. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4029	comparison of the effects of whole and juiced fruits and vegetables on enamel demineralisation in situ. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4030	diet and prevention of oral cancer: strategies for clinical practice. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4031	association of serum ldl cholesterol level with periodontitis among patients visiting a tertiary-care hospital. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4032	oral implications of the vegan diet: observational study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4033	relationship between saturated fatty acids and periodontal disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4034	high-fiber foods reduce periodontal disease progression in men aged 65 and older: the veterans affairs normative aging study/dental longitudinal st... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4035	brushing abrasion of softened and remineralised dentin: an in situ study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4036	diet, nutrition and the prevention of dental diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4037	carcinogenic potencies of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons for back-door neighbors of restaurants with cooking emissions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4038	impact of barbecued meat consumed in pregnancy on birth outcomes accounting for personal prenatal exposure to airborne polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. birth cohort study in poland
med-4039	airborne mutagens produced by frying beef, pork and a soy-based food. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4040	effect of cruciferous vegetable consumption on heterocyclic aromatic amine metabolism in man. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4041	airborne mutagens produced by frying beef, pork and a soy-based food. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4042	cooked meat and risk of breast cancer--lifetime versus recent dietary intake. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4043	intervention of human breast cell carcinogenesis chronically induced by 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine
med-4044	occurrence of heterocyclic amines in cooked meat products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4045	the protective effect of the flavonoids on food-mutagen-induced dna damage in peripheral blood lymphocytes from colon cancer patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4046	dietary flavonoid intake and breast cancer survival among women on long island. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4047	determination of total phenolic content and antioxidant activity of garlic (allium sativum) and elephant garlic (allium ampeloprasum) by attenuated... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4048	diallyl sulfide inhibits phip-induced dna strand breaks in normal human breast epithelial cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4049	intervention of human breast cell carcinogenesis chronically induced by 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine
med-4050	green tea consumption and breast cancer risk or recurrence: a meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4051	the protective effect of the flavonoids on food-mutagen-induced dna damage in peripheral blood lymphocytes from colon cancer patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4052	diallyl sulfide inhibits phip-induced dna strand breaks in normal human breast epithelial cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4053	occurrence of heterocyclic amines in cooked meat products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4054	biomonitoring of carcinogenic heterocyclic aromatic amines in hair: a validation study
med-4055	diallyl sulfide inhibits phip-induced dna strand breaks in normal human breast epithelial cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4056	formation and biochemistry of carcinogenic heterocyclic aromatic amines in cooked meats. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4057	well-done meat intake and the risk of breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4058	biomonitoring of carcinogenic heterocyclic aromatic amines in hair: a validation study
med-4059	effect of diet on serum albumin and hemoglobin adducts of 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (phip) in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4060	formation and biochemistry of carcinogenic heterocyclic aromatic amines in cooked meats. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4061	formation of a mutagenic heterocyclic aromatic amine from creatinine in urine of meat eaters and vegetarians. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4062	the cooked meat-derived mammary carcinogen 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine promotes invasive behaviour of breast cancer cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4063	meat, fat and risk of breast cancer: a case-control study from uruguay. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4064	intake of fried meat and risk of cancer: a follow-up study in finland. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4065	dietary intake of meat and meat-derived heterocyclic aromatic amines and their correlation with dna adducts in female breast tissue. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4066	cooked meat and risk of breast cancer--lifetime versus recent dietary intake. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4067	formation of a mutagenic heterocyclic aromatic amine from creatinine in urine of meat eaters and vegetarians. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4068	the cooked meat-derived mammary carcinogen 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine promotes invasive behaviour of breast cancer cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4069	meat, fat and risk of breast cancer: a case-control study from uruguay. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4070	intake of fried meat and risk of cancer: a follow-up study in finland. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4071	detection of phip (2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine) in the milk of healthy women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4072	dietary intake of meat and meat-derived heterocyclic aromatic amines and their correlation with dna adducts in female breast tissue. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4073	the cooked food derived carcinogen 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b] pyridine is a potent oestrogen: a mechanistic basis for its tissue-speci... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4074	cooked meat and risk of breast cancer--lifetime versus recent dietary intake. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4075	formation of a mutagenic heterocyclic aromatic amine from creatinine in urine of meat eaters and vegetarians. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4076	diet and disease symptoms in rheumatic diseases--results of a questionnaire based survey. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4077	vegan diet alleviates fibromyalgia symptoms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4078	antioxidants in vegan diet and rheumatic disorders. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4079	a program consisting of a phytonutrient-rich medical food and an elimination diet ameliorated fibromyalgia symptoms and promoted toxic-element deto... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4080	mediterranean diet or extended fasting's influence on changing the intestinal microflora, immunoglobulin a secretion and clinical outcome in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and fibromyalgia: an observational study
med-4081	potential dietary links to central sensitization in fibromyalgia: past reports and future directions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4082	fibromyalgia and nutrition, what do we know? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4083	reduced plasma fibrinogen, serum peroxides, lipids, and apolipoproteins after a 3-week vegetarian diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4084	diet and disease symptoms in rheumatic diseases--results of a questionnaire based survey. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4085	vegan diet alleviates fibromyalgia symptoms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4086	antioxidants in vegan diet and rheumatic disorders. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4087	fibromyalgia and nutrition, what do we know? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4088	reduced plasma fibrinogen, serum peroxides, lipids, and apolipoproteins after a 3-week vegetarian diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4089	antiproliferative effects of apple peel extract against cancer cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4090	development of an ingredient containing apple peel, as a source of polyphenols and dietary fiber. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4091	assessment of antioxidant activity by using different in vitro methods. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4092	uric acid: a marker of increased cardiovascular risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4093	serum uric acid level as an independent risk factor for all-cause, cardiovascular, and ischemic stroke mortality: a chinese cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4094	dietary fiber and breast cancer risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4095	mortality from western cancers rose dramatically among african-americans during the 20th century: are dietary animal products to blame? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4096	use of statistics to assess the global burden of breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4097	green tea and breast cancer
med-4098	dietary intakes of mushrooms and green tea combine to reduce the risk of breast cancer in chinese women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4099	meta-analysis of the effect of β-glucan intake on blood cholesterol and glucose levels. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4100	the deadly quartet. upper-body obesity, glucose intolerance, hypertriglyceridemia, and hypertension. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4101	epidemiology of the metabolic syndrome in the usa. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4102	vegetarian dietary patterns are associated with a lower risk of metabolic syndrome
med-4103	a pilot study of potassium supplementation in the treatment of hypokalemic patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized, double-blinded, placeb... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4104	changes in nutrient intake and dietary quality among participants with type 2 diabetes following a low-fat vegan diet or a conventional diabetes di... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4105	effects of a very low-fat, vegan diet in subjects with rheumatoid arthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4106	potassium intake, stroke, and cardiovascular disease a meta-analysis of prospective studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4107	sodium and potassium intakes among us adults: nhanes 2003–2008
med-4108	evolution of the human diet: linking our ancestral diet to modern functional foods as a means of chronic disease prevention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4109	the flip side of immune surveillance: immune dependency. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4110	immunological enhancement of breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4111	effects of a very low-fat, vegan diet in subjects with rheumatoid arthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4112	the insulin-like growth factor-i receptor is regulated by cd28 and protects activated t cells from apoptosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4113	good riddance: thymocyte clonal deletion prevents autoimmunity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4114	upregulation of lymphocyte apoptosis as a strategy for preventing and treating autoimmune disorders: a role for whole-food vegan diets, fish oil an... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4115	the rise and fall of horror autotoxicus and forbidden clones. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4116	the flip side of immune surveillance: immune dependency. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4117	immunological enhancement of breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4118	recrudescent kaposi's sarcoma after initiation of haart: a manifestation of immune reconstitution syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4119	melanomas in renal transplant recipients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4120	sucrose activates human taste pathways differently from artificial sweetener. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4121	effect of covert nutritive dilution on the spontaneous food intake of obese individuals: a pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4122	erythritol is a sweet antioxidant. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4123	aspartame-induced fibromyalgia, an unusual but curable cause of chronic pain. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4124	erythritol is a sweet antioxidant. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4125	human gut microbiota does not ferment erythritol. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4126	formaldehyde, aspartame, and migraines: a possible connection. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4127	aspartame-induced fibromyalgia, an unusual but curable cause of chronic pain. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4128	validation of a method for the detection of virulent yersinia enterocolitica and their distribution in slaughter pigs from conventional and alterna... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4129	contamination of carcasses with human pathogenic yersinia enterocolitica 4/o:3 originates from pigs infected on farms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4130	prevalence of yersinia enterocolitica shedding and bioserotype distribution in ontario finisher pig herds in 2001, 2002, and 2004. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4131	annual cost of illness and quality-adjusted life year losses in the united states due to 14 foodborne pathogens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4132	ranking the disease burden of 14 pathogens in food sources in the united states using attribution data from outbreak investigations and expert elic... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4133	too early to dismiss yersinia enterocolitica infection in the aetiology of graves' disease: evidence from a twin case-control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4134	prevalence of pathogenic yersinia enterocolitica strains in pigs in the united states
med-4135	behavior of yersinia enterocolitica in foods
med-4136	vital signs: incidence and trends of infection with pathogens transmitted commonly through food--foodborne diseases active surveillance network, 10... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4137	prevalence of yersinia enterocolitica in different phases of production on swine farms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4138	yersinia enterocolitica: a brief review of the issues relating to the zoonotic pathogen, public health challenges, and the pork production chain. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4139	prevalence of yersinia enterocolitica in market weight hogs in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4140	factors related to the prevalence of pathogenic yersinia enterocolitica on pig farms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4141	piglets are a source of pathogenic yersinia enterocolitica on fattening-pig farms
med-4142	human pathogens and tetracycline-resistant bacteria in bioaerosols of swine confinement buildings and in nasal flora of hog producers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4143	yersinia enterocolitica infection in diarrheal patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4144	fresh meat and further processing characteristics of ham muscles from finishing pigs fed ractopamine hydrochloride. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4145	effects of dietary factors and other metabolic modifiers on quality and nutritional value of meat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4146	meta-analysis of the effects of ractopamine hydrochloride on carcass cutability and primal yields of finishing pigs. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4147	occurrence of steroid hormones and antibiotics in shallow groundwater impacted by livestock waste control facilities. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4148	aggressiveness and brain amine concentration in dominant and subordinate finishing pigs fed the beta-adrenoreceptor agonist ractopamine. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4149	creation of a databank for content of antioxidants in food products by an amperometric method. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4150	pseudo-maple syrup urine disease due to maternal prenatal ingestion of fenugreek. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4151	screen-based entertainment time, all-cause mortality, and cardiovascular events: population-based study with ongoing mortality and hospital events ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4152	do all sedentary activities lead to weight gain: sleep does not. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4153	occupational sitting and health risks: a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4154	association of dietary fat, vegetables and antioxidant micronutrients with skin ageing in japanese women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4155	gerson regimen. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4156	gerson regimen. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4157	compounded bioidentical menopausal hormone therapy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4158	brain volumes, cognitive impairment, and conjugated equine estrogens
med-4159	conjugated equine estrogens and incidence of probable dementia and mild cognitive impairment in postmenopausal women: women's health initiative mem... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4160	risks and benefits of estrogen plus progestin in healthy postmenopausal women: principal results from the women's health initiative randomized cont... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4161	delusions in frontotemporal lobar degeneration
med-4162	declines in breast cancer after the whi: apparent impact of hormone therapy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4163	protein dietary reference intakes may be inadequate for vegetarians if low amounts of animal protein are consumed. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4164	evidence that protein requirements have been significantly underestimated. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4165	dietary sources and antioxidant effects of ergothioneine. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4166	concentrations of antibiotic residues vary between different edible muscle tissues in poultry. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4167	influence of water and food consumption on inadvertent antibiotics intake among general population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4168	influence of a five-day vegetarian diet on urinary levels of antibiotics and phthalate metabolites: a pilot study with "temple stay" participants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4169	pcdd/fs and dioxin-like pcbs in human milk and estimation of infants' daily intake: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4170	to breastfeed or not to breastfeed: a review of the impact of lactational exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls (pcbs) on infants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4171	changes in serum concentrations of polychlorinated biphenyls (pcbs), hydroxylated pcb metabolites and pentachlorophenol during pregnancy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4172	increasing pre-school children's consumption of fruit and vegetables. a modelling and rewards intervention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4173	chronic disease and infant nutrition: is it significant to public health? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4174	perfluorooctanesulfonate and related fluorochemicals in human blood from several countries. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4175	perfluorochemicals in meat, eggs and indoor dust in china: assessment of sources and pathways of human exposure to perfluorochemicals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4176	perfluorooctanesulfonate and related fluorochemicals in human blood samples from china. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4177	variability in pesticide deposition and source contributions to snowpack in western us national parks
med-4178	chronic dietary risk characterization for pesticide residues: a ranking and scoring method integrating agricultural uses and food contamination data. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4179	pesticides in rain in four agricultural watersheds in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4180	half-lives of serum pcb congener concentrations in environmentally exposed early adolescents. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4181	organochlorine pesticides in umbilical cord blood serum of women from southern spain and adherence to the mediterranean diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4182	polybrominated diphenyl ethers in u.s. meat and poultry from two statistically designed surveys showing trends and levels from 2002 to 2008. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4183	flame retardants in the serum of pet dogs and in their food. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4184	high concentrations of polybrominated diphenylethers (pbdes) in breast adipose tissue of california women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4185	relationship between urine bisphenol-a level and declining male sexual function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4186	bisphenol a (bpa) in u.s. food. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4187	organochlorine pesticide residues in bamboo shoot. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4188	hydro-alcoholic extract of crocus sativus l. versus fluoxetine in the treatment of mild to moderate depression: a double-blind, randomized pilot tr... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4189	crocus sativus l. (saffron) in the treatment of premenstrual syndrome: a double-blind, randomised and placebo-controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4190	psychological and neuroendocrinological effects of odor of saffron (crocus sativus). - pubmed - ncbi
med-4191	crocus sativus l. (saffron) in the treatment of premenstrual syndrome: a double-blind, randomised and placebo-controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4192	psychological and neuroendocrinological effects of odor of saffron (crocus sativus). - pubmed - ncbi
med-4193	crocus sativus l. (saffron) in the treatment of premenstrual syndrome: a double-blind, randomised and placebo-controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4194	antimutagens and anticarcinogens: a survey of putative interceptor molecules. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4195	effects of chlorophyll and chlorophyllin on low-dose aflatoxin b(1) pharmacokinetics in human volunteers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4196	molecular pathways for cancer chemoprevention by dietary phytochemicals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4197	natural compounds in the human diet and their ability to bind mutagens prevents dna-mutagen intercalation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4198	insect food for astronauts: gas exchange in silkworms fed on mulberry and lettuce and the nutritional value of these insects for human consumption ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4199	differences in postprandial inflammatory responses to a 'modern' v. traditional meat meal: a preliminary study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4200	differences in postprandial inflammatory responses to a 'modern' v. traditional meat meal: a preliminary study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4201	influence of keeping pheasants in captivity vs. nature on the biological value of meat and its use in human nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4202	non-nutrient causes of low-grade, systemic inflammation: support for a 'canary in the mineshaft' view of obesity in chronic disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4203	evolution of dietary antioxidants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4204	evolution of the human diet: linking our ancestral diet to modern functional foods as a means of chronic disease prevention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4205	chemical safety of meat and meat products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4206	vegetarian diets and public health: biomarker and redox connections. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4207	growth factors and their receptors in cancer metastases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4208	mechanisms of breast cancer bone metastasis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4209	circulating insulin-like growth factor (igf) peptides and prostate cancer risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis
med-4210	relationship of dietary protein and soy isoflavones to serum igf-1 and igf binding proteins in the prostate cancer lifestyle trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4211	dietary soy and fats in relation to serum insulin-like growth factor-1 and insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-3 levels in premenopausal jap... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4212	insulin-like growth factor-1 and binding protein-3 in a 2-year soya intervention among premenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4213	clinical events in prostate cancer lifestyle trial: results from two years of follow-up. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4214	intensive lifestyle changes may affect the progression of prostate cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4215	relationship of dietary protein and soy isoflavones to serum igf-1 and igf binding proteins in the prostate cancer lifestyle trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4216	relationship of dietary protein and soy isoflavones to serum igf-1 and igf binding proteins in the prostate cancer lifestyle trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4217	effect of diet and exercise on serum insulin, igf-i, and igfbp-1 levels and growth of lncap cells in vitro (united states). - pubmed - ncbi
med-4218	intensive lifestyle changes may affect the progression of prostate cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4219	vegan proteins may reduce risk of cancer, obesity, and cardiovascular disease by promoting increased glucagon activity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4220	effect of diet and exercise on serum insulin, igf-i, and igfbp-1 levels and growth of lncap cells in vitro (united states). - pubmed - ncbi
med-4221	effects of a low-fat, high-fiber diet and exercise program on breast cancer risk factors in vivo and tumor cell growth and apoptosis in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4222	growth hormone receptor deficiency is associated with a major reduction in pro-aging signaling, cancer and diabetes in humans
med-4223	insulin-like growth factor 1 (igf1), igf binding protein 3 (igfbp3), and breast cancer risk: pooled individual data analysis of 17 prospective studies
med-4224	growth factors and their receptors in cancer metastases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4225	why do centenarians escape or postpone cancer? the role of igf-1, inflammation and p53. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4226	mechanisms of breast cancer bone metastasis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4227	cancer and aging: from the kinetics of biological parameters to the kinetics of cancer incidence and mortality. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4228	circulating insulin-like growth factor (igf) peptides and prostate cancer risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis
med-4229	effects of dietary flaxseed lignan extract on symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4230	lifestyle factors, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and lower urinary tract symptoms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4231	onion and garlic intake and the odds of benign prostatic hyperplasia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4232	food groups and risk of benign prostatic hyperplasia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4233	pilot study of dietary fat restriction and flaxseed supplementation in men with prostate cancer before surgery: exploring the effects on hormonal l... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4234	dietary patterns, supplement use, and the risk of benign prostatic hyperplasia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4235	transurethral electrovaporization of the prostate in benign prostatic hyperplasia. evaluation of results using different urodynamic parameters. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4236	benign prostatic hyperplasia in primary care: what you need to know. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4237	epidemiological survey of benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostatic cancer in china. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4238	a low-fat diet and/or strenuous exercise alters the igf axis in vivo and reduces prostate tumor cell growth in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4239	a low-fat diet and/or strenuous exercise alters the igf axis in vivo and reduces prostate tumor cell growth in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4240	effects of a low-fat, high-fiber diet and exercise program on breast cancer risk factors in vivo and tumor cell growth and apoptosis in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4241	effects of a low-fat, high-fiber diet and exercise program on breast cancer risk factors in vivo and tumor cell growth and apoptosis in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4242	intensive lifestyle changes may affect the progression of prostate cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4243	intensive lifestyle changes for reversal of coronary heart disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4244	resolving the coronary artery disease epidemic through plant-based nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4245	the effectiveness and efficacy of an intensive cardiac rehabilitation program in 24 sites. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4246	a multicomponent intervention reduces body weight and cardiovascular risk at a geico corporate site. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4247	can lifestyle changes reverse coronary heart disease? the lifestyle heart trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4248	resolving the coronary artery disease epidemic through plant-based nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4249	crossover study of diets enriched with virgin olive oil, walnuts or almonds. effects on lipids and other cardiovascular risk markers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4250	short-term effects of a snack including dried prunes on energy intake and satiety in normal-weight individuals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4251	nutraceutical supplements for weight loss: a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4252	weight gain over 5 years in 21,966 meat-eating, fish-eating, vegetarian, and vegan men and women in epic-oxford. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4253	effects of cake made from whole soy powder on postprandial blood glucose and insulin levels in human subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4254	effect of a high nutrient density diet on long-term weight loss: a retrospective chart review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4255	resolving the coronary artery disease epidemic through plant-based nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4256	a systematic review of waist-to-height ratio as a screening tool for the prediction of cardiovascular disease and diabetes: 0·5 could be a suitable... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4257	a systematic review of body fat distribution and mortality in older people
med-4258	plant and animal protein intake and its association with overweight and obesity among the belgian population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4259	cross-sectional association of nut intake with adiposity in a mediterranean population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4260	meat consumption and prospective weight change in participants of the epic-panacea study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4261	meat consumption and prospective weight change in participants of the epic-panacea study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4262	satiety: have we neglected dietary non-nutrients? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4263	high polyphenol, low probiotic diet for weight loss because of intestinal microbiota interaction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4264	could increased time spent in a thermal comfort zone contribute to population increases in obesity? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4265	microbial ecology: human gut microbes associated with obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4266	high polyphenol, low probiotic diet for weight loss because of intestinal microbiota interaction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4267	studies on apple and blueberry fruit constituents: do the polyphenols reach the colon after ingestion? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4268	propionate. anti-obesity and satiety enhancing factor? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4269	butyrate and other short-chain fatty acids as modulators of immunity: what relevance for health? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4270	quantification of butyryl coa:acetate coa-transferase genes reveals different butyrate production capacity in individuals according to diet and age. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4271	mechanisms of primary cancer prevention by butyrate and other products formed during gut flora-mediated fermentation of dietary fibre. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4272	vegetarian diet affects genes of oxidative metabolism and collagen synthesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4273	characterization of bacteria, clostridia and bacteroides in faeces of vegetarians using qpcr and pcr-dgge fingerprinting. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4274	infectobesity: obesity of infectious origin. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4275	a vegetarian dietary pattern as a nutrient-dense approach to weight management: an analysis of the national health and nutrition examination survey... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4276	propionate. anti-obesity and satiety enhancing factor? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4277	endocrine-disrupting chemicals and obesity development in humans: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4278	epic-oxford: lifestyle characteristics and nutrient intakes in a cohort of 33 883 meat-eaters and 31 546 non meat-eaters in the uk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4279	nuts and healthy body weight maintenance mechanisms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4280	beneficial effects of l-arginine on reducing obesity: potential mechanisms and important implications for human health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4281	beneficial effects of l-arginine on reducing obesity: potential mechanisms and important implications for human health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4282	nuts and healthy body weight maintenance mechanisms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4283	nuts and healthy body weight maintenance mechanisms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4284	effects of peanut processing on body weight and fasting plasma lipids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4285	a review of the evidence: nuts and body weight. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4286	nuts and healthy body weight maintenance mechanisms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4287	two weeks of overfeeding with candy, but not peanuts, increases insulin levels and body weight. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4288	out-of-hand nut consumption is associated with improved nutrient intake and health risk markers in us children and adults: national health and nutr... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4289	nut consumption is associated with decreased health risk factors for cardiovascular disease and metabolic syndrome in u.s. adults: nhanes 1999-2004. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4290	cross-sectional association of nut intake with adiposity in a mediterranean population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4291	nut consumption, weight gain and obesity: epidemiological evidence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4292	a review of the evidence: nuts and body weight. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4293	phytosterol composition of nuts and seeds commonly consumed in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4294	divergent changes in serum sterols during a strict uncooked vegan diet in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4295	phytosterol composition of nuts and seeds commonly consumed in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4296	the effects of phytosterols present in natural food matrices on cholesterol metabolism and ldl-cholesterol: a controlled feeding trial
med-4297	effects of almond consumption on the reduction of ldl-cholesterol: a discussion of potential mechanisms and future research directions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4298	effects of almond consumption on the reduction of ldl-cholesterol: a discussion of potential mechanisms and future research directions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4299	evolution of the human diet: linking our ancestral diet to modern functional foods as a means of chronic disease prevention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4300	cultural and historical aspects of mediterranean nuts with emphasis on their attributed healthy and nutritional properties. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4301	nut consumption and blood lipid levels: a pooled analysis of 25 intervention trials. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4302	cardiovascular effects of consumption of black versus english walnuts. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4303	oxidative stability and shelf-life evaluation of selected culinary oils. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4304	protein-source tryptophan as an efficacious treatment for social anxiety disorder: a pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4305	macronutrient intake, plasma large neutral amino acids and mood during weight-reducing diets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4306	brain serotonin content: physiological regulation by plasma neutral amino acids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4307	protein-source tryptophan as an efficacious treatment for social anxiety disorder: a pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4308	effect of nutrient intake on premenstrual depression. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4309	hplc analysis of serotonin, tryptamine, tyramine, and the hydroxycinnamic acid amides of serotonin and tyramine in food vegetables. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4310	the association between dietary patterns and mental health in early adolescence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4311	dietary patterns and depressive symptoms among japanese men and women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4312	post-epidemic eosinophilia myalgia syndrome associated with l-tryptophan
med-4313	a vegetarian dietary pattern as a nutrient-dense approach to weight management: an analysis of the national health and nutrition examination survey... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4314	nuts: anti-atherogenic food? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4315	differences in metal content of the heart muscle in death from ischemic heart disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4316	systemic regulation of intestinal iron absorption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4317	intestinal iron absorption: regulation by dietary & systemic factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4318	low-ph cola beverages do not affect women's iron absorption from a vegetarian meal. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4319	phytate in foods and significance for humans: food sources, intake, processing, bioavailability, protective role and analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4320	higher bioaccessibility of iron and zinc from food grains in the presence of garlic and onion. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4321	dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate and postmenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4322	dhea therapy in postmenopausal women: the need to move forward beyond the lack of evidence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4323	dehydroepiandrosterone and ageing. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4324	egg yolk consumption and carotid plaque. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4325	kiwifruit improves bowel function in patients with irritable bowel syndrome with constipation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4326	renal function parameters of thai vegans compared with non-vegans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4327	phosphate restriction in diet therapy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4328	updates on human papillomavirus and genital warts and counseling messages from the 2010 sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4329	protective effects of green tea extracts (polyphenon e and egcg) on human cervical lesions. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4330	green and black tea in relation to gynecologic cancers
med-4331	black tea is not significantly different from water in the maintenance of normal hydration in human subjects: results from a randomised controlled ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4332	potent antimutagenic activity of white tea in comparison with green tea in the salmonella assay. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4333	high fat intake leads to acute postprandial exposure to circulating endotoxin in type 2 diabetic subjects
med-4334	the capacity of foodstuffs to induce innate immune activation of human monocytes in vitro is dependent on food content of stimulants of toll-like r... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4335	chocolate at heart: the anti-inflammatory impact of cocoa flavanols. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4336	regular consumption of dark chocolate is associated with low serum concentrations of c-reactive protein in a healthy italian population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4337	the capacity of foodstuffs to induce innate immune activation of human monocytes in vitro is dependent on food content of stimulants of toll-like r... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4338	effect of a single high-fat meal on endothelial function in healthy subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4339	anti-inflammatory effects of plant-based foods and of their constituents. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4340	assessment of atherosclerosis: the role of flow-mediated dilatation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4341	effects of a high-fat meal on pulmonary function in healthy subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4342	animal protein intake and risk of inflammatory bowel disease: the e3n prospective study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4343	anti-inflammatory effects of plant-based foods and of their constituents. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4344	anti-inflammatory effects of plant-based foods and of their constituents. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4345	consumption of polyunsaturated fatty acids, fish, and nuts and risk of inflammatory disease mortality. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4346	determinants of inflammatory markers in a bi-ethnic population
med-4347	a legume-based hypocaloric diet reduces proinflammatory status and improves metabolic features in overweight/obese subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4348	diet and inflammation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4349	anti-inflammatory effects of plant-based foods and of their constituents. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4350	high-antioxidant potatoes: acute in vivo antioxidant source and hypotensive agent in humans after supplementation to hypertensive subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4351	human innate immunosenescence: causes and consequences for immunity in old age
med-4352	effects of dietary protein on composition and metabolism of plasma lipoproteins in rabbits. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4353	effects of dietary proteins on plasma lipoprotein levels in normal subjects: interaction with dietary cholesterol. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4354	scientific and technical factors affecting the setting of salmonella criteria for raw poultry: a global perspective. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4355	public knowledge and beliefs about diarrheal disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4356	delusional parasitosis in neurological patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4357	effect of extracted housefly pupae peptide mixture on chilled pork preservation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4358	bacteriophage biocontrol in animals and meat products
med-4359	pictorial essay: complications of a swallowed fish bone
med-4360	can ciguatera be a sexually transmitted disease? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4361	dirty money: an investigation into the hygiene status of some of the world's currencies as obtained from food outlets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4362	hand washing frequencies and procedures used in retail food services. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4363	from barnyard to food table: the omnipresence of hepatitis e virus and risk for zoonotic infection and food safety
med-4364	occupational transmission of hepatitis c virus resulting from use of the same supermarket meat slicer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4365	adverse effects of concentrated green tea extracts. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4366	the marketing of dietary supplements in north america: the emperor is (almost) naked. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4367	health food stores' recommendations for nausea and migraines during pregnancy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4368	emerging issues associated with hiv patients seeking advice from health food stores. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4369	interventions for nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy
med-4370	health food stores' recommendations for nausea and migraines during pregnancy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4371	emerging issues associated with hiv patients seeking advice from health food stores. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4372	health information provided by retail health food outlets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4373	dangerous nutrition? calcium, vitamin d, and shark cartilage nutritional supplements and cancer-related hypercalcemia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4374	health food store recommendations for breast cancer patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4375	an evaluation of mercury concentrations in three brands of canned tuna. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4376	hair mercury levels of women of reproductive age in ontario, canada: implications to fetal safety and fish consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4377	dietary factors and incident atrial fibrillation: the framingham heart study
med-4378	dietary intake of n−3 and n−6 fatty acids and the risk of clinical depression in women: a 10-y prospective follow-up study
med-4379	occurrence of pharmaceuticals and personal care products in fish: results of a national pilot study in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4380	domoic acid and human exposure risks: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4381	amnesic shellfish poison. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4382	diet, vegetarianism, and cataract risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4383	plasma carotenoids, retinol and tocopherol levels and the risk of ovarian cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4384	glaucoma risk and the consumption of fruits and vegetables among older women in the study of osteoporotic fractures. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4385	the influence of dietary lutein and zeaxanthin on visual performance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4386	vegetarian and vegan diets in type 2 diabetes management. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4387	vegetarian diets and incidence of diabetes in the adventist health study-2
med-4388	overall diet quality and age-related macular degeneration
med-4389	usefulness of vegetarian and vegan diets for treating type 2 diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4390	influence of piperine on the pharmacokinetics of curcumin in animals and human volunteers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4391	lifestyle related causes of cancer and chemoprevention through phytonutrients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4392	citrus limonoids: analysis, bioactivity, and biomedical prospects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4393	phytonutrient intake by adults in the united states in relation to fruit and vegetable consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4394	evidence for acne-promoting effects of milk and other insulinotropic dairy products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4395	high school dietary dairy intake and teenage acne. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4396	milk consumption and acne in adolescent girls. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4397	milk consumption and acne in teenaged boys
med-4398	high school dietary dairy intake and teenage acne. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4399	beta-casomorphins-7 in infants on different type of feeding and different levels of psychomotor development. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4400	the influence of μ-opioid receptor agonist and antagonist peptides on peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmcs). - pubmed - ncbi
med-4401	relation of beta-casomorphin to apnea in sudden infant death syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4402	relation of beta-casomorphin to apnea in sudden infant death syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4403	identification of cheese mite species inoculated on mimolette and milbenkase cheese through cryogenic scanning electron microscopy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4404	the influence of creatine supplementation on the cognitive functioning of vegetarians and omnivores. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4405	creatine: are the benefits worth the risk? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4406	longitudinal trends in gasoline price and physical activity: the cardia study
med-4407	addition of açaí (euterpe oleracea) to cigarettes has a protective effect against emphysema in mice. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4408	protein oxidation in emulsified cooked burger patties with added fruit extracts: influence on colour and texture deterioration during chill storage. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4409	impact of dietary shift to higher-antioxidant foods in copd: a randomised trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4410	do vegetables and fruits reduce the risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? a case-control study in japan. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4411	impact of dietary shift to higher-antioxidant foods in copd: a randomised trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4412	nutritional risk factors for the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) in male smokers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4413	development and validation of an algorithm to establish a total antioxidant capacity database of the us diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4414	fruit and vegetable intake and risk of acute coronary syndrome. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4415	cinnamon and health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4416	cinnamon intake lowers fasting blood glucose: meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4417	glycated haemoglobin and blood pressure-lowering effect of cinnamon in multi-ethnic type 2 diabetic patients in the uk: a randomized, placebo-contr... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4418	toxicology and risk assessment of coumarin: focus on human data. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4419	determination of citrulline in watermelon rind. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4420	watermelon consumption increases plasma arginine concentrations in adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4421	effects of watermelon supplementation on aortic blood pressure and wave reflection in individuals with prehypertension: a pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4422	oral l-citrulline supplementation improves erection hardness in men with mild erectile dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4423	the collateral network concept: a reassessment of the anatomy of spinal cord perfusion
med-4424	atherosclerosis and disc degeneration/low-back pain--a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4425	hyperlipidemia and sexual function in premenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4426	riding in shopping carts and exposure to raw meat and poultry products: prevalence of, and factors associated with, this risk factor for salmonella... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4427	left subclavian arterioesophageal fistula induced by chicken bone with upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage and unexpected death: report of a case. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4428	prevalence of potentially neuropathic campylobacter jejuni strains on commercial broiler chicken products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4429	cross-contamination versus undercooking of poultry meat or eggs - which risks need to be managed first? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4430	guillain-barré syndrome: modern theories of etiology. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4431	mortality in the baltimore union poultry cohort: non-malignant diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4432	cancer mortality in poultry slaughtering/processing plant workers belonging to a union pension fund. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4433	cancer mortality in poultry slaughtering/processing plant workers belonging to a union pension fund. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4434	mortality from malignant diseases-update of the baltimore union poultry cohort. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4435	consumption of meat and dairy and lymphoma risk in the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4436	consumption of meat and dairy and lymphoma risk in the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4437	dioxins (pcdd/fs) and pcbs in offal: occurrence and dietary exposure. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4438	caffeine-not just a stimulant. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4439	a case of fatal caffeine poisoning. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4440	soy food consumption and breast cancer prognosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4441	soy isoflavones and risk of cancer recurrence in a cohort of breast cancer survivors: life after cancer epidemiology (lace) study
med-4442	the intestinal microbiome: a separate organ inside the body with the metabolic potential to influence the bioactivity of botanicals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4443	flaxseed: a potential source of food, feed and fiber. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4444	ductal carcinoma in situ: terminology, classification, and natural history. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4445	alcohol intake and mortality among women with invasive breast cancer
med-4446	quantification of a broad spectrum of lignans in cereals, oilseeds, and nuts. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4447	lignan contents of dutch plant foods: a database including lariciresinol, pinoresinol, secoisolariciresinol and matairesinol. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4448	construction of a flavonoid database for assessing intake in a population-based sample of women on long island, new york. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4449	post-diagnosis dietary factors and survival after invasive breast cancer
med-4450	post-diagnosis dietary factors and survival after invasive breast cancer
med-4451	heterocyclic amines: mutagens/carcinogens produced during cooking of meat and fish. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4452	the role of diet and physical activity in breast, colorectal, and prostate cancer survivorship: a review of the literature
med-4453	bioavailability and kinetics of sulforaphane in humans after consumption of cooked versus raw broccoli. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4454	bioavailability and kinetics of sulforaphane in humans after consumption of cooked versus raw broccoli. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4455	glucoraphanin and 4-hydroxyglucobrassicin contents in seeds of 59 cultivars of broccoli, raab, kohlrabi, radish, cauliflower, brussels sprouts, kal... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4456	safety, tolerance, and metabolism of broccoli sprout glucosinolates and isothiocyanates: a clinical phase i study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4457	sulforaphane induces dna single strand breaks in cultured human cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4458	inactivation of tautomerase activity of macrophage migration inhibitory factor by sulforaphane: a potential biomarker for anti-inflammatory intervention
med-4459	impact of nrf2 on uvb-induced skin inflammation/photoprotection and photoprotective effect of sulforaphane. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4460	anti-carcinogenic effects of sulforaphane in association with its apoptosis-inducing and anti-inflammatory properties in human cervical cancer cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4461	sulforaphane potentiates oxaliplatin-induced cell growth inhibition in colorectal cancer cells via induction of different modes of cell death. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4462	sulforaphane protects human chondrocytes against cell death induced by various stimuli. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4463	phenethyl isothiocyanate sensitizes human cervical cancer cells to apoptosis induced by cisplatin
med-4464	the cancer stem cell: premises, promises and challenges. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4465	from milk to malignancy: the role of mammary stem cells in development, pregnancy and breast cancer
med-4466	kale juice improves coronary artery disease risk factors in hypercholesterolemic men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4467	red meat and colon cancer: should we become vegetarians, or can we make meat safer? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4468	effect of ascorbic acid and green tea on endogenous formation of n-nitrosodimethylamine and n-nitrosopiperidine in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4469	paleolithic vs. modern diets--selected pathophysiological implications. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4470	effects of vitamins c and e on n-nitroso compound formation, carcinogenesis, and cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4471	lung deposition of fine and ultrafine particles outdoors and indoors during a cooking event and a no activity period. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4472	n-nitroso compounds in the diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4473	airborne mutagens produced by frying beef, pork and a soy-based food. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4474	the effect of dietary factors on nitrosoproline levels in human urine. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4475	understanding tobacco smoke carcinogen nnk and lung tumorigenesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4476	determination of total n-nitroso compounds and their precursors in frankfurters, fresh meat, dried salted fish, sauces, tobacco, and tobacco smoke ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4477	determination of volatile nitrosamines in meat products by microwave-assisted extraction and dispersive liquid-liquid microextraction coupled to ga... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4478	epidemilogical trends strongly suggest exposures as etiologic agents in the pathogenesis of sporadic alzheimer's disease, diabetes mellitus, and no... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4479	long-term exposure to sodium nitrite and risk of esophageal carcinoma: a cohort study for 30 years. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4480	principal component analysis of dietary and lifestyle patterns in relation to risk of subtypes of esophageal and gastric cancer
med-4481	dietary fat and meat intakes and risk of reflux esophagitis, barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma
med-4482	meat consumption, cooking practices, meat mutagens and risk of prostate cancer
med-4483	n-nitroso compounds and cancer incidence: the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition (epic)-norfolk study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4484	salt, processed meat and the risk of cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4485	meat and components of meat and the risk of bladder cancer in the nih-aarp diet and health study
med-4486	endometrial cancer and meat consumption: a case-cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4487	red and processed meat and colorectal cancer incidence: meta-analysis of prospective studies
med-4488	epidemilogical trends strongly suggest exposures as etiologic agents in the pathogenesis of sporadic alzheimer's disease, diabetes mellitus, and no... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4489	the nitrate story--no end in sight. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4490	a survey of feeding n-nitrosodimethylamine (ndma) to domestic animals over an 18 year period. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4491	nutritional composition of dry-cured ham and its role in a healthy diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4492	a meta-analysis of maternal cured meat consumption during pregnancy and the risk of childhood brain tumors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4493	processed meat and colorectal cancer: a review of epidemiologic and experimental evidence
med-4494	associations of processed meat and unprocessed red meat intake with incident diabetes: the strong heart family study
med-4495	acute dietary nitrate supplementation improves cycling time trial performance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4496	the effect of fruit and vegetable intake on risk for coronary heart disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4497	the case of the purple colon. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4498	trial of garlic as an adjunct therapy for multidrug resistant pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia in a critically ill infant. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4499	investigating antibacterial effects of garlic (allium sativum) concentrate and garlic-derived organosulfur compounds on campylobacter jejuni by using fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, raman spectroscopy, and electron microscopy
med-4500	beeturia and the biological fate of beetroot pigments. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4501	beeturia and the biological fate of beetroot pigments. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4502	lifestyle recommendations to reduce the risk of kidney stones. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4503	dietary inorganic nitrate improves mitochondrial efficiency in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4504	dietary nitrate supplementation reduces the o2 cost of walking and running: a placebo-controlled study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4505	dietary nitrate reduces maximal oxygen consumption while maintaining work performance in maximal exercise. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4506	acute dietary nitrate supplementation improves cycling time trial performance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4507	the increase in plasma nitrite after a dietary nitrate load is markedly attenuated by an antibacterial mouthwash. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4508	dietary inorganic nitrate improves mitochondrial efficiency in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4509	a meta-analysis of the effect of soy protein supplementation on serum lipids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4510	non-soy legume consumption lowers cholesterol levels: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
med-4511	metabolic vitamin b12 status on a mostly raw vegan diet with follow-up using tablets, nutritional yeast, or probiotic supplements. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4512	oral cobalamin remains medicine's best kept secret. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4513	diagnostic accuracy of holotranscobalamin, methylmalonic acid, serum cobalamin, and other indicators of tissue vitamin b₁₂ status in the elderly. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4514	low-carbohydrate diets and all-cause and cause-specific mortality: two cohort studies
med-4515	the effect of a plant-based low-carbohydrate ("eco-atkins") diet on body weight and blood lipid concentrations in hyperlipidemic subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4516	ability of a high-total antioxidant capacity diet to increase stool weight and bowel antioxidant status in human subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4517	fecal weight, colon cancer risk, and dietary intake of nonstarch polysaccharides (dietary fiber) - pubmed - ncbi
med-4518	antioxidant activity in human faeces. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4519	food selection based on high total antioxidant capacity improves endothelial function in a low cardiovascular risk population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4520	assessment of atherosclerosis: the role of flow-mediated dilatation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4521	food selection based on high total antioxidant capacity improves endothelial function in a low cardiovascular risk population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4522	food selection based on high total antioxidant capacity improves endothelial function in a low cardiovascular risk population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4523	lipophilic and hydrophilic antioxidant capacities of common foods in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4524	the chemistry behind antioxidant capacity assays. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4525	studies on the antidiarrhoeal effect of dragon's blood from croton urucurana. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4526	mutagenic and antioxidant activities of croton lechleri sap in biological systems. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4527	sangre de grado croton palanostigma induces apoptosis in human gastrointestinal cancer cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4528	heavy metal content of ayurvedic herbal medicine products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4529	lead, mercury, and arsenic in us- and indian-manufactured ayurvedic medicines sold via the internet
med-4530	detection of toxic heavy metals and pesticide residue in herbal plants which are commonly used in the herbal formulations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4531	monitoring of mercury, arsenic, and lead in traditional asian herbal preparations on the dutch market and estimation of associated risks. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4532	cytotoxic response of breast cancer cell lines, mcf 7 and t 47 d to triphala and its modification by antioxidants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4533	heavy metal content of ayurvedic herbal medicine products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4534	triphala, ayurvedic formulation for treating and preventing cancer: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4535	detection of toxic heavy metals and pesticide residue in herbal plants which are commonly used in the herbal formulations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4536	potential of traditional ayurvedic formulation, triphala, as a novel anticancer drug. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4537	antitumour effects of phyllanthus emblica l.: induction of cancer cell apoptosis and inhibition of in vivo tumour promotion and in vitro invasion o... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4538	effect of amla fruit (emblica officinalis gaertn.) on blood glucose and lipid profile of normal subjects and type 2 diabetic patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4539	natural products as sources of new drugs over the last 25 years. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4540	marked variability of monacolin levels in commercial red yeast rice products: buyer beware! - pubmed - ncbi
med-4541	comparative cardiovascular effects of thiazolidinediones: systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies
med-4542	antitumour effects of phyllanthus emblica l.: induction of cancer cell apoptosis and inhibition of in vivo tumour promotion and in vitro invasion o... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4543	antitumour effects of phyllanthus emblica l.: induction of cancer cell apoptosis and inhibition of in vivo tumour promotion and in vitro invasion o... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4544	amla (emblica officinalis gaertn), a wonder berry in the treatment and prevention of cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4545	açai palm fruit (euterpe oleracea mart.) pulp improves survival of flies on a high fat diet
med-4546	acute and subacute toxicity of tyramine, spermidine, spermine, putrescine and cadaverine in rats. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4547	determination of biogenic amines in korean traditional fermented soybean paste (doenjang). - pubmed - ncbi
med-4548	common household chemicals and the allergy risks in pre-school age children
med-4549	maternal meat and fat consumption during pregnancy and suspected atopic eczema in japanese infants aged 3-4 months: the osaka maternal and child he... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4550	an impact of the diet on serum fatty acid and lipid profiles in polish vegetarian children and children with allergy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4551	maternal meat and fat consumption during pregnancy and suspected atopic eczema in japanese infants aged 3-4 months: the osaka maternal and child he... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4552	advanced glycation end products as biomarkers and gerontotoxins - a basis to explore methylglyoxal-lowering agents for alzheimer's disease? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4553	advanced glycation end products as biomarkers and gerontotoxins - a basis to explore methylglyoxal-lowering agents for alzheimer's disease? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4554	advanced glycation end products in foods and a practical guide to their reduction in the diet
med-4555	analysis of risk factors for abdominal aortic aneurysm in a cohort of more than 3 million individuals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4556	tolerable upper intake levels for trans fat, saturated fat, and cholesterol. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4557	can a statin neutralize the cardiovascular risk of unhealthy dietary choices? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4558	preventing and arresting coronary atherosclerosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4559	can a statin neutralize the cardiovascular risk of unhealthy dietary choices? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4560	preventing and arresting coronary atherosclerosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4561	use of intensive lipid-lowering therapy in patients hospitalized with acute coronary syndrome: an analysis of 65,396 hospitalizations from 344 hosp... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4562	use of intensive lipid-lowering therapy in patients hospitalized with acute coronary syndrome: an analysis of 65,396 hospitalizations from 344 hosp... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4563	nasal saline irrigations for the symptoms of chronic rhinosinusitis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4564	acute rhinosinusitis in adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4565	the clinical significance of nasal irrigation bottle contamination. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4566	taking vitamin d with the largest meal improves absorption and results in higher serum levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin d. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4567	prevalence and correlates of vitamin d deficiency in us adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4568	vitamin d: extraskeletal health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4569	low vitamin d status: definition, prevalence, consequences and correction
med-4570	vitamin d supplement doses and serum 25-hydroxyvitamin d in the range associated with cancer prevention. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4571	vitamin d: extraskeletal health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4572	vitamin d: extraskeletal health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4573	low vitamin d status: definition, prevalence, consequences and correction
med-4574	prevalence and correlates of vitamin d deficiency in us adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4575	vitamin d: extraskeletal health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4576	impact of different stages of juice processing on the anthocyanin, flavonol, and procyanidin contents of cranberries. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4577	evaluation of phenolic compounds in commercial fruit juices and fruit drinks. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4578	effects of consumption of pomegranate juice on carotid intima-media thickness in men and women at moderate risk for coronary heart disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4579	apple juice prevents oxidative stress induced by amyloid-beta in culture. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4580	apple juice improved behavioral but not cognitive symptoms in moderate-to-late stage alzheimer's disease in an open-label pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4581	fruit and vegetable consumption and cognitive decline in aging women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4582	midlife fruit and vegetable consumption and risk of dementia in later life in swedish twins
med-4583	cognitive performance among the elderly in relation to the intake of plant foods. the hordaland health study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4584	evaluation of phenolic compounds in commercial fruit juices and fruit drinks. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4585	evaluation of phenolic compounds in commercial fruit juices and fruit drinks. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4586	apple juice prevents oxidative stress induced by amyloid-beta in culture. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4587	identification of metabolites in human plasma and urine after consumption of a polyphenol-rich juice drink. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4588	the effect of flavanol-rich cocoa on the fmri response to a cognitive task in healthy young people. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4589	flavonoid permeability across an in situ model of the blood-brain barrier. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4590	apple juice prevents oxidative stress induced by amyloid-beta in culture. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4591	[6]-gingerol attenuates β-amyloid-induced oxidative cell death via fortifying cellular antioxidant defense system. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4592	an overview of livestock-associated mrsa in agriculture. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4593	detection and quantification of methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (mrsa) clones in retail meat products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4594	an overview of livestock-associated mrsa in agriculture. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4595	too much of too little: xylitol, an unusual trigger of a chronic metabolic hyperchloremic acidosis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4596	non-typhoidal salmonellosis: emerging problems. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4597	they think they know but do they? misalignment of perceptions of lifestyle modification knowledge among health professionals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4598	they think they know but do they? misalignment of perceptions of lifestyle modification knowledge among health professionals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4599	nutrition education in u.s. medical schools: latest update of a national survey
med-4600	essentials of healthy eating: a guide
med-4601	influencing public nutrition for non-communicable disease prevention: from community intervention to national programme--experiences from finland. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4602	manufactured uncertainty: protecting public health in the age of contested science and product defense. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4603	reductions in cardiovascular disease projected from modest reductions in dietary salt
med-4604	the comet assay with 8 mouse organs: results with 39 currently used food additives. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4605	genotoxicity and cell transformation studies with sorbates in syrian hamster embryo fibroblasts. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4606	does potassium sorbate induce genotoxic or mutagenic effects in lymphocytes? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4607	effects of sorbic acid and its salts on chromosome aberrations, sister chromatid exchanges and gene mutations in cultured chinese hamster cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4608	reduction in cardiovascular risk by sodium-bicarbonated mineral water in moderately hypercholesterolemic young adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4609	the beriberi analogy to myocardial infarction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4610	resolving the coronary artery disease epidemic through plant-based nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4611	systematic review of the incidence of sudden cardiac death in the united states
med-4612	vegan proteins may reduce risk of cancer, obesity, and cardiovascular disease by promoting increased glucagon activity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4613	resolving the coronary artery disease epidemic through plant-based nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4614	systematic review of the incidence of sudden cardiac death in the united states
med-4615	diet, lifestyle, and the etiology of coronary artery disease: the cornell china study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4616	can lifestyle changes reverse coronary heart disease? the lifestyle heart trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4617	systematic review of the incidence of sudden cardiac death in the united states
med-4618	in vitro evaluation of genotoxicity of avocado (persea americana) fruit and leaf extracts in human peripheral lymphocytes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4619	selective induction of apoptosis of human oral cancer cell lines by avocado extracts via a ros-mediated mechanism. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4620	chemopreventive characteristics of avocado fruit. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4621	acute and sub-acute toxicological assessment of the aqueous seed extract of persea americana mill (lauraceae) in rats
med-4622	a probabilistic characterization of the health benefits of reducing methyl mercury intake in the united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4623	algal-oil capsules and cooked salmon: nutritionally equivalent sources of docosahexaenoic acid. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4624	simultaneous quantitation of multiple classes of organohalogen compounds in fish oils with direct sample introduction comprehensive two-dimensional... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4625	low-dose arachidonic acid intake increases erythrocytes and plasma arachidonic acid in young women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4626	individual variation and intraclass correlation in arachidonic acid and eicosapentaenoic acid in chicken muscle
med-4627	diet and inflammation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4628	an association between dietary arachidonic acid, measured in adipose tissue, and ulcerative colitis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4629	vegetarian diet for patients with rheumatoid arthritis: can the clinical effects be explained by the psychological characteristics of the patients? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4630	arachidonic-acid-derived eicosanoids: roles in biology and immunopathology. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4631	anti-inflammatory effects of a low arachidonic acid diet and fish oil in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4632	the effect of vegetarian diets on plasma lipid and platelet levels. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4633	vegetarian diets are associated with healthy mood states: a cross-sectional study in seventh day adventist adults
med-4634	fatty acid profile of human saliva: a possible indicator of dietary fat intake. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4635	globalization, diet, and health: an example from tonga.
med-4636	passclaim--gut health and immunity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4637	fibre and bowel transit times. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4638	bowel movement and constipation frequencies and the risk of colorectal cancer among men in the netherlands cohort study on diet and cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4639	fecal weight, colon cancer risk, and dietary intake of nonstarch polysaccharides (dietary fiber) - pubmed - ncbi
med-4640	passclaim--gut health and immunity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4641	cytological abnormalities in nipple aspirates of breast fluid from women with severe constipation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4642	diets and hormonal levels in postmenopausal women with or without breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4643	dietary habits and breast cancer incidence among seventh-day adventists. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4644	estrogen excretion patterns and plasma levels in vegetarian and omnivorous women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4645	vitamin and mineral use and risk of prostate cancer: the case-control surveillance study
med-4646	intake of fiber and nuts during adolescence and incidence of proliferative benign breast disease
med-4647	multivitamin use and the risk of mortality and cancer incidence
med-4648	phytochemicals for breast cancer prevention by targeting aromatase. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4649	structural basis for androgen specificity and oestrogen synthesis in human aromatase
med-4650	phytochemicals for breast cancer prevention by targeting aromatase. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4651	breast cancer incidence rates in u.s. women are no longer declining. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4652	ductal carcinoma in situ: terminology, classification, and natural history. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4653	dietary intake is associated with phthalate body burden in a nationally representative sample
med-4654	sexual selection and genital anatomy of male primates. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4655	phthalates exposure and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in school-age children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4656	decrease in anogenital distance among male infants with prenatal phthalate exposure
med-4657	facial skin coloration affects perceived health of human faces
med-4658	bioavailability of natural carotenoids in human skin compared to blood. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4659	facial skin coloration affects perceived health of human faces
med-4660	variability of iodine content in common commercially available edible seaweeds. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4661	iodine status and thyroid function of boston-area vegetarians and vegans
med-4662	iodine-induced neonatal hypothyroidism secondary to maternal seaweed consumption: a common practice in some asian cultures to promote breast milk s... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4663	hyperthyroidism caused by excessive consumption of sausages. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4664	iodine toxicity from soy milk and seaweed ingestion is associated with serious thyroid dysfunction. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4665	some subgroups of reproductive age women in the united states may be at risk for iodine deficiency. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4666	iodine status and thyroid function of boston-area vegetarians and vegans
med-4667	association between isolation of staphylococcus aureus one week after calving and milk yield, somatic cell count, clinical mastitis, and culling th... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4668	cretinism revisited. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4669	a 22-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind controlled trial of crocus sativus in the treatment of mild-to-moderate alzheimer's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4670	saffron in the treatment of patients with mild to moderate alzheimer's disease: a 16-week, randomized and placebo-controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4671	saffron in the treatment of patients with mild to moderate alzheimer's disease: a 16-week, randomized and placebo-controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4672	seroprevalence of cysticercosis in an orthodox jewish community. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4673	they think they know but do they? misalignment of perceptions of lifestyle modification knowledge among health professionals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4674	nutrition education in u.s. medical schools: latest update of a national survey
med-4675	dietary cholesterol and egg yolks: not for patients at risk of vascular disease
med-4676	dietary cholesterol and egg yolks: not for patients at risk of vascular disease
med-4677	does milk increase mucus production? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4678	differential effects of reproductive factors on the risk of pre- and postmenopausal breast cancer. results from a large cohort of french women
med-4679	pubertal assessment method and baseline characteristics in a mixed longitudinal study of girls
med-4680	diet throughout childhood and age at menarche in a contemporary cohort of british girls. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4681	relation of isoflavones and fiber intake in childhood to the timing of puberty. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4682	calcium absorption in australian osteopenic post-menopausal women: an acute comparative study of fortified soymilk to cows' milk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4683	serum concentrations of vitamin b12 and folate in british male omnivores, vegetarians, and vegans: results from a cross-sectional analysis of the epic-oxford cohort study
med-4684	maternal and neonatal vitamin b12 deficiency detected through expanded newborn screening--united states, 2003-2007. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4685	maternal and neonatal vitamin b12 deficiency detected through expanded newborn screening--united states, 2003-2007. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4686	proposal for a dietary "phytochemical index". - pubmed - ncbi
med-4687	vegetarian diets and public health: biomarker and redox connections. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4688	the total antioxidant content of more than 3100 foods, beverages, spices, herbs and supplements used worldwide
med-4689	the total antioxidant content of more than 3100 foods, beverages, spices, herbs and supplements used worldwide
med-4690	putting cancer to sleep at night: the neuroendocrine/circadian melatonin signal. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4691	dietary correlates of urinary 6-sulfatoxymelatonin concentrations in the nurses' health study cohorts
med-4692	light at night co-distributes with incident breast but not lung cancer in the female population of israel. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4693	light-at-night, circadian disruption and breast cancer: assessment of existing evidence
med-4694	total visual blindness is protective against breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4695	electric light causes cancer? surely you're joking, mr. stevens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4696	modulation of inflammatory genes by natural dietary bioactive compounds. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4697	is there more to aging than mitochondrial dna and reactive oxygen species?
med-4698	role of mitochondrial oxidative stress to explain the different longevity between genders: protective effect of estrogens. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4699	ageing and eating. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4700	association between manganese superoxide dismutase (mnsod) val-9ala polymorphism and cancer risk - a meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4701	examination of the antiglycemic properties of vinegar in healthy adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4702	delayed gastric emptying rate may explain improved glycaemia in healthy subjects to a starchy meal with added vinegar. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4703	vinegar supplementation lowers glucose and insulin responses and increases satiety after a bread meal in healthy subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4704	lipoid pneumonia presenting as non resolving community acquired pneumonia: a case report
med-4705	human cancer cell antiproliferative and antioxidant activities of juglans regia l. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4706	regular consumption of nuts is associated with a lower risk of cardiovascular disease in women with type 2 diabetes
med-4707	prospective study of nut consumption, long-term weight change, and obesity risk in women
med-4708	long-term walnut supplementation without dietary advice induces favorable serum lipid changes in free-living individuals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4709	olive oil and walnut breakfasts reduce the postprandial inflammatory response in mononuclear cells compared with a butter breakfast in healthy men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4710	effect of pistachio diet on lipid parameters, endothelial function, inflammation, and oxidative status: a prospective study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4711	licorice and licochalcone-a induce autophagy in lncap prostate cancer cells by suppression of bcl-2 expression and the mtor pathway. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4712	goji (lycium barbarum and l. chinense): phytochemistry, pharmacology and safety in the perspective of traditional uses and recent popularity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4713	a case of kombucha tea toxicity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4714	vegetables, but not pickled vegetables, are negatively associated with the risk of breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4715	effects of date ( phoenix dactylifera l., medjool or hallawi variety) consumption by healthy subjects on serum glucose and lipid levels and on seru... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4716	the fruit of the date palm: its possible use as the best food for the future? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4717	tea catechins' affinity for human cannabinoid receptors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4718	vegetarian diets are associated with healthy mood states: a cross-sectional study in seventh day adventist adults
med-4719	tea catechins' affinity for human cannabinoid receptors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4720	opiate receptor: demonstration in nervous tissue. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4721	cannabinoid receptor localization in brain.
med-4722	dietary protein and bone health: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4723	veganism, bone mineral density, and body composition: a study in buddhist nuns. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4724	[consequences of exclusive breast-feeding in vegan mother newborn--case report]. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4725	schizophrenia-like psychotic episode precipitated by cobalamin deficiency. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4726	impact of adopting a vegan diet or an olestra supplementation on plasma organochlorine concentrations: results from two pilot studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4727	dietary intake of organotin compounds in finland: a market-basket study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4728	environmental obesogens: organotins and endocrine disruption via nuclear receptor signaling. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4729	do organohalogen contaminants contribute to histopathology in liver from east greenland polar bears (ursus maritimus)?
med-4730	simultaneous quantitation of multiple classes of organohalogen compounds in fish oils with direct sample introduction comprehensive two-dimensional... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4731	no effect of fish oil supplementation on serum inflammatory markers and their interrelationships: a randomized controlled trial in healthy, middle-... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4732	polychlorinated biphenyl-77 induces adipocyte differentiation and proinflammatory adipokines and promotes obesity and atherosclerosis
med-4733	mercury in human hair as an indicator of the fish consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4734	exploration of biomarkers for total fish intake in pregnant norwegian women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4735	dioxins, polychlorinated biphenyls, methyl mercury and omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids as biomarkers of fish consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4736	exploration of biomarkers for total fish intake in pregnant norwegian women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4737	nowhere to hide: chemical toxicants and the unborn child. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4738	urinary excretion of total isothiocyanates from cruciferous vegetables shows high dose-response relationship and may be a useful biomarker for isot... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4739	nowhere to hide: chemical toxicants and the unborn child. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4740	evaluation of background exposures of americans to dioxin-like compounds in the 1990s and the 2000s. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4741	egg consumption and the risk of cancer: a multisite case-control study in uruguay. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4742	evaluation of a real-time polymerase chain reaction (pcr) assay for detection of anisakis simplex parasite as a food-borne allergen source in seafo... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4743	performance evaluation of sbr treatment for nitrogen removal from tannery wastewater. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4744	diet quality of preschool children and maternal perceptions/misperceptions: the genesis study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4745	dietary protein intake throughout childhood is associated with the timing of puberty. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4746	fast food hamburgers: what are we really eating? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4747	hormonal growth promoting agents in food producing animals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4748	body fat and animal protein intakes are associated with adrenal androgen secretion in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4749	consequence of boar edible tissue consumption on urinary profiles of nandrolone metabolites. i. mass spectrometric detection and quantification of ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4750	assessment of endogenous androgen levels in meat, liver and testis of iranian native cross-breed male sheep and bull by gas chromatography-mass spe... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4751	the possible role of female sex hormones in milk from pregnant cows in the development of breast, ovarian and corpus uteri cancers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4752	acne, dairy and cancer
med-4753	exposure to exogenous estrogen through intake of commercial milk produced from pregnant cows. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4754	comparison of sex hormonal and metabolic profiles between omnivores and vegetarians in pre- and post-menopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4755	soybean isoflavone exposure does not have feminizing effects on men: a critical examination of the clinical evidence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4756	consumption of animal products, their nutrient components and postmenopausal circulating steroid hormone concentrations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4757	comparison of sex hormonal and metabolic profiles between omnivores and vegetarians in pre- and post-menopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4758	meats, processed meats, obesity, weight gain and occurrence of diabetes among adults: findings from adventist health studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4759	sex hormone-binding globulin (shbg), estradiol and breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4760	the microbiome and obesity: is obesity linked to our gut flora? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4761	characterization of bacteria, clostridia and bacteroides in faeces of vegetarians using qpcr and pcr-dgge fingerprinting. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4762	probiotic effects on cold and influenza-like symptom incidence and duration in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4763	an obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy harvest. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4764	gut microbiota composition is associated with body weight, weight gain and biochemical parameters in pregnant women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4765	dietary predictors of 5-year changes in waist circumference. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4766	viral obesity: fact or fiction? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4767	association of adenovirus infection with human obesity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4768	infectobesity: obesity of infectious origin. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4769	effect of adenovirus infection on adiposity in chicken. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4770	from the cover: the extremely slow and variable activity of dihydrofolate reductase in human liver and its implications for high folic acid intake
med-4771	from the cover: the extremely slow and variable activity of dihydrofolate reductase in human liver and its implications for high folic acid intake
med-4772	non-anaemic pregnant women should not take iron supplements. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4773	first trimester curtailment of iron absorption: innate suppression of a teratogen? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4774	caffeine in pregnancy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4775	green tea consumption and mortality among japanese elderly people: the prospective shizuoka elderly cohort. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4776	laboratory, epidemiological, and human intervention studies show that tea (camellia sinensis) may be useful in the prevention of obesity
med-4777	green tea: nature's defense against malignancies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4778	inhibitory effect of tea polyphenols on local tissue damage induced by snake venoms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4779	tea consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis of cohort studies
med-4780	association between green tea consumption and tooth loss: cross-sectional results from the ohsaki cohort 2006 study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4781	soy isoflavones and risk of cancer recurrence in a cohort of breast cancer survivors: life after cancer epidemiology (lace) study
med-4782	survey of commercially available chocolate- and cocoa-containing products in the united states. 2. comparison of flavan-3-ol content with nonfat co... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4783	childhood soy intake and breast cancer risk in asian american women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4784	dietary flavonoid intake and breast cancer survival among women on long island. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4785	soy isoflavones and risk of cancer recurrence in a cohort of breast cancer survivors: life after cancer epidemiology (lace) study
med-4786	adolescent and adult soy food intake and breast cancer risk: results from the shanghai women's health study
med-4787	intensity and timing of physical activity in relation to postmenopausal breast cancer risk: the prospective nih-aarp diet and health study
med-4788	the risks of copper toxicity contributing to cognitive decline in the aging population and to alzheimer's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4789	effects of aerobic exercise on mild cognitive impairment
med-4790	the risks of copper toxicity contributing to cognitive decline in the aging population and to alzheimer's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4791	bovine spongiform encephalopathy and aquaculture. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4792	evaluation of the possible transmission of bse and scrapie to gilthead sea bream (sparus aurata)
med-4793	effectiveness of alcohol-based hand rubs for removal of clostridium difficile spores from hands. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4794	community-acquired methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus: what do we need to know? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4795	increasing incidence of community-associated atypical clostridium difficile disease in children. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4796	clostridium difficile in food--innocent bystander or serious threat? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4797	varied prevalence of clostridium difficile in an integrated swine operation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4798	efficacy of cleaning products for c difficile
med-4799	clostridium difficile in retail meat products, usa, 2007
med-4800	detection and characterization of clostridium difficile in retail chicken. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4801	methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (mrsa) in food production animals. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4802	methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (mrsa) strain st398 is present in midwestern u.s. swine and swine workers
med-4803	isolation and characterization of methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus strains from louisiana retail meats
med-4804	effectiveness of alcohol-based hand rubs for removal of clostridium difficile spores from hands. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4805	risk factors associated with colibacillosis outbreaks in caged layer flocks. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4806	medical and economic impact of extraintestinal infections due to escherichia coli: focus on an increasingly important endemic problem. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4807	presence and characterization of shiga toxin-producing escherichia coli and other potentially diarrheagenic e. coli strains in retail meats
med-4808	antimicrobial-resistant and extraintestinal pathogenic escherichia coli in retail foods. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4809	food reservoir for escherichia coli causing urinary tract infections
med-4810	bowel function measurements of individuals with different eating patterns.
med-4811	fish-induced keriorrhea. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4812	much meat, much malady: changing perceptions of the epidemiology of hepatitis e. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4813	detection and characterization of infectious hepatitis e virus from commercial pig livers sold in local grocery stores in the usa. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4814	national mortality rates from chronic liver disease and consumption of alcohol and pig meat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4815	hepatitis e virus load in swine organs and tissues at slaughterhouse determined by real-time rt-pcr. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4816	thermal stability of hepatitis e virus. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4817	sporadic acute or fulminant hepatitis e in hokkaido, japan, may be food-borne, as suggested by the presence of hepatitis e virus in pig liver as food. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4818	pork intake and human papillomavirus-related disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4819	mortality from malignant diseases-update of the baltimore union poultry cohort. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4820	cancer incidence in british vegetarians
med-4821	diet, lifestyle, and acute myeloid leukemia in the nih–aarp cohort
med-4822	sweets, sweetened beverages, and risk of pancreatic cancer in a large population-based case–control study
med-4823	dietary fatty acids and pancreatic cancer in the nih-aarp diet and health study
med-4824	4. chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer, lifestyle-related diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4825	pancreatic cancer: a review of the evidence on causation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4826	macronutrients, fatty acids, cholesterol and pancreatic cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4827	men with low serum cholesterol have a lower risk of high-grade prostate cancer in the placebo arm of the prostate cancer prevention trial
med-4828	association between statin-associated myopathy and skeletal muscle damage
med-4829	statin therapy, muscle function and falls risk in community-dwelling older adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4830	statin therapy induces ultrastructural damage in skeletal muscle in patients without myalgia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4831	effects of plant-based diets on plasma lipids. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4832	effects of kiwifruit consumption on serum lipid profiles and antioxidative status in hyperlipidemic subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4833	the effect of strawberries in a cholesterol-lowering dietary portfolio. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4834	cola intake and serum lipids in the oslo health study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4835	whole-grain ready-to-eat oat cereal, as part of a dietary program for weight loss, reduces low-density lipoprotein cholesterol in adults with overw... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4836	prevalence of different types of gallstone in the patients with cholelithiasis at kathmandu medical college, nepal. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4837	prevalence of different types of gallstone in the patients with cholelithiasis at kathmandu medical college, nepal. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4838	cholesterol gallstone disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4839	migrating fish bone presenting as acute onset of neck lump. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4840	homeopathy: what does the "best" evidence tell us? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4841	humoral immunity to cow's milk proteins and gliadin within the etiology of recurrent aphthous ulcers? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4842	efficacy of purslane in the treatment of oral lichen planus. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4843	changes in laboratory variables in rheumatoid arthritis patients during a trial of fasting and one-year vegetarian diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4844	the role of meat in the expression of rheumatoid arthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4845	controlled trial of fasting and one-year vegetarian diet in rheumatoid arthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4846	divergent changes in serum sterols during a strict uncooked vegan diet in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4847	fasting followed by vegetarian diet in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4848	vegetarian diet for patients with rheumatoid arthritis--status: two years after introduction of the diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4849	uncooked, lactobacilli-rich, vegan food and rheumatoid arthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4850	antioxidants in vegan diet and rheumatic disorders. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4851	rheumatoid arthritis treated with vegetarian diets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4852	self-reported food intolerance and mucosal reactivity after rectal food protein challenge in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4853	effects of a very low-fat, vegan diet in subjects with rheumatoid arthritis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4854	changes in plasma phospholipid fatty acids and their relationship to disease activity in rheumatoid arthritis patients treated with a vegetarian diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4855	does the hip powder of rosa canina (rosehip) reduce pain in osteoarthritis patients?--a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4856	rose hip herbal remedy in patients with rheumatoid arthritis - a randomised controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4857	benzene in infant carrot juice: further insight into formation mechanism and risk assessment including consumption data from the donald study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4858	plasma beta-carotene is not a suitable biomarker of fruit and vegetable intake in german subjects with a long-term high consumption of fruits and v... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4859	jam processing and storage effects on blueberry polyphenolics and antioxidant capacity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4860	blueberry supplementation improves memory in older adults
med-4861	fruit and vegetable intake and overall cancer risk in the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition (epic). - pubmed - ncbi
med-4862	phenolic profiles and antioxidant properties of apple skin extracts. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4863	phenolic substance characterization and chemical and cell-based antioxidant activities of 11 lentils grown in the northern united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4864	comparative flavonoids contents of selected herbs and associations of their radical scavenging activity with antiproliferative actions in v79-4 cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4865	evaluation of the cyto- and genotoxic activity of yerba mate (ilex paraguariensis) in human lymphocytes in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4866	no evidence supports vitamin e indiscriminate supplementation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4867	evaluation of the genotoxicity of stevioside and steviol using six in vitro and one in vivo mutagenicity assays. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4868	stevia (stevia rebaudiana) a bio-sweetener: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4869	evaluation of certain food additives. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4870	first detection of anatoxin-a in human and animal dietary supplements containing cyanobacteria. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4871	monosodium glutamate 'allergy': menace or myth? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4872	safety considerations and potential interactions of vitamins: should vitamins be considered drugs? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4873	hypervitaminosis a inducing intra-hepatic cholestasis--a rare case report. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4874	species identification and vitamin a level in lutjanid fish implicated in vitamin a poisoning. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4875	between celiac disease and irritable bowel syndrome: the “no man’s land” of gluten sensitivity
med-4876	cyanobacterial neurotoxin bmaa in als and alzheimer's disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4877	increased telomerase activity and comprehensive lifestyle changes: a pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4878	dietary patterns, food groups, and telomere length in the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis (mesa)
med-4879	estimating age of humans based on telomere shortening. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4880	effects of very-low-carbohydrate (horsemeat- or beef-based) diets and restricted feeding on weight gain, feed and energy efficiency, as well as ser... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4881	improvement of gelling properties of lizardfish mince as influenced by microbial transglutaminase and fish freshness. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4882	comparisons of a chicken-based formula with soy-based formula in infants with cow milk allergy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4883	[flatufonia--or the musical anus]. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4884	an investigation of the structural aspects of the tomato fruit by means of quantitative nuclear magnetic resonance imaging. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4885	flaxseed supplementation (not dietary fat restriction) reduces prostate cancer proliferation rates in men presurgery
med-4886	clinical events in prostate cancer lifestyle trial: results from two years of follow-up. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4887	angina pectoris and atherosclerotic risk factors in the multisite cardiac lifestyle intervention program. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4888	changes in prostate gene expression in men undergoing an intensive nutrition and lifestyle intervention
med-4889	intensive lifestyle changes may affect the progression of prostate cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4890	effect of diet and exercise intervention on the growth of prostate epithelial cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4891	epidemiology of sudden cardiac death: clinical and research implications
med-4892	egg consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes in men and women
med-4893	incident heart failure is associated with lower whole-grain intake and greater high-fat dairy and egg intake in the atherosclerosis risk in communities (aric) study
med-4894	veganism, bone mineral density, and body composition: a study in buddhist nuns. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4895	milk consumption: aggravating factor of acne and promoter of chronic diseases of western societies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4896	acne vulgaris: a disease of western civilization. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4897	milk consumption: aggravating factor of acne and promoter of chronic diseases of western societies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4898	animal foods, protein, calcium and prostate cancer risk: the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition
med-4899	quantitative measurement of endogenous estrogen metabolites, risk-factors for development of breast cancer, in commercial milk products by lc-ms/ms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4900	recent advances in berry supplementation and age-related cognitive decline. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4901	antioxidant status in humans after consumption of blackberry (rubus fruticosus l.) juices with and without defatted milk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4902	addition of milk prevents vascular protective effects of tea. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4903	antioxidant activity of blueberry fruit is impaired by association with milk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4904	antiallergic activities of pigmented rice bran extracts in cell assays. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4905	supplementation of black rice pigment fraction improves antioxidant and anti-inflammatory status in patients with coronary heart disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4906	antiallergic activities of pigmented rice bran extracts in cell assays. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4907	black rice anthocyanins inhibit cancer cells invasion via repressions of mmps and u-pa expression. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4908	aluminium and lead: molecular mechanisms of brain toxicity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4909	aluminum bioavailability from basic sodium aluminum phosphate, an approved food additive emulsifying agent, incorporated in cheese
med-4910	inorganic arsenic in rice bran and its products are an order of magnitude higher than in bulk grain. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4911	the environmental and public health risks associated with arsenical use in animal feeds. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4912	inorganic arsenic in rice bran and its products are an order of magnitude higher than in bulk grain. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4913	probabilistic modelling of exposure doses and implications for health risk characterization: glycoalkaloids from potatoes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4914	potato glycoalkaloids: true safety or false sense of security? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4915	a human dietary risk assessment associated with glycoalkaloid responses of potato to colorado potato beetle defoliation. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4916	influence of storage and household processing on the agaritine content of the cultivated agaricus mushroom. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4917	soy consumption for reduction of menopausal symptoms. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4918	increased prevalence and mortality in undiagnosed celiac disease
med-4919	long-term health and quality-of-life consequences of mass screening for childhood celiac disease: a 10-year follow-up study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4920	prevalence of celiac disease in at-risk and not-at-risk groups in the united states: a large multicenter study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4921	diagnosing mild enteropathy celiac disease: a randomized, controlled clinical study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4922	a "glyconutrient sham". - pubmed - ncbi
med-4923	multivitamin use and risk of cancer and cardiovascular disease in the women’s health initiative cohorts
med-4924	long-term use of β-carotene, retinol, lycopene, and lutein supplements and lung cancer risk: results from the vitamins and lifestyle (vital) study
med-4925	multivitamin use and risk of cancer and cardiovascular disease in the women’s health initiative cohorts
med-4926	role of iron in neurotoxicity: a cause for concern in the elderly? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4927	potential liver damage associated with over-the-counter vitamin supplements. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4928	vitamins c and e and beta carotene supplementation and cancer risk: a randomized controlled trial
med-4929	vitamins e and c in the prevention of cardiovascular disease in men: the physicians’ health study ii randomized trial
med-4930	potential liver damage associated with over-the-counter vitamin supplements. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4931	algal-oil capsules and cooked salmon: nutritionally equivalent sources of docosahexaenoic acid. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4932	aquaculture practices and potential human health risks: current knowledge and future priorities. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4933	polybrominated diphenyl ethers (pbdes) in farmed and wild salmon marketed in the northeastern united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4934	atmospherically deposited pbdes, pesticides, pcbs, and pahs in western us national park fish: concentrations and consumption guidelines
med-4935	polychlorinated naphthalenes in human adipose tissue from new york, usa. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4936	algal-oil capsules and cooked salmon: nutritionally equivalent sources of docosahexaenoic acid. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4937	levels of polybrominated diphenyl ethers (pbdes) and organochlorine pollutants in two species of antarctic fish (chionodraco hamatus and trematomus... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4938	pcbs enhance collagen i expression from human peritoneal fibroblasts
med-4939	dieldrin-induced neurotoxicity: relevance to parkinson's disease pathogenesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4940	2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in maternal breast milk and newborn head circumference. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4941	dioxin may promote inflammation-related development of endometriosis
med-4942	association of polychlorinated biphenyls with hypertension in the 1999-2002 national health and nutrition examination survey. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4943	persistent organic pollutants in fish oil supplements on the canadian market: polychlorinated biphenyls and organochlorine insecticides. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4944	studies of fish consumption as source of methylmercury should consider fish-meal-fed farmed fish and other animal foods. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4945	sub-clinical neurobehavioral abnormalities associated with low level of mercury exposure through fish consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4946	sub-clinical neurobehavioral abnormalities associated with low level of mercury exposure through fish consumption. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4947	hong kong male subfertility links to mercury in human hair and fish. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4948	mercury levels and fish consumption practices in women of child-bearing age in the florida panhandle. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4949	public health and economic consequences of methyl mercury toxicity to the developing brain
med-4950	the pubertal timing controversy in the usa, and a review of possible causative factors for the advance in timing of onset of puberty. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4951	role of environmental estrogens in the deterioration of male factor fertility. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4952	zinc and selenium nutritional status in vegetarians. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4953	protein intake and ovulatory infertility
med-4954	semen quality of fertile us males in relation to their mothers' beef consumption during pregnancy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4955	toxoplasma and schizophrenia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4956	high prevalence and abundant atypical genotypes of toxoplasma gondii isolated from lambs destined for human consumption in the usa. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4957	detection of sarcocystis parasites in retail beef: a regional survey combining histological and genetic detection methods. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4958	biogenic amines in fish: roles in intoxication, spoilage, and nitrosamine formation--a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4959	public health response to puffer fish (tetrodotoxin) poisoning from mislabeled product. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4960	a fishy cause of sudden near fatal hypotension. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4961	haff disease after eating salmon. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4962	necrotizing soft-tissue infections and primary sepsis caused by vibrio vulnificus and vibrio cholerae non-o1. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4963	sushi delights and parasites: the risk of fishborne and foodborne parasitic zoonoses in asia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4964	microbial quality of raw aquacultured fish fillets procured from internet and local retail markets. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4965	hand washing frequencies and procedures used in retail food services. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4966	cluster of ciguatera fish poisoning--north carolina, 2007. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4967	severe diarrhea caused by cholera toxin-producing vibrio cholerae serogroup o75 infections acquired in the southeastern united states. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4968	cholera and other types of vibriosis: a story of human pandemics and oysters on the half shell. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4969	hand washing frequencies and procedures used in retail food services. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4970	detection of phip in grilled chicken entrées at popular chain restaurants throughout california. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4971	airborne mutagens produced by frying beef, pork and a soy-based food. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4972	detection of phip in grilled chicken entrées at popular chain restaurants throughout california. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4973	concentration and profile of 22 urinary polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon metabolites in the us population. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4974	polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (pahs) in coffee brew samples: analytical method by gc-ms, profile, levels and sources. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4975	serum polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons among children with and without asthma: correlation to environmental and dietary factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4976	airborne mutagens produced by frying beef, pork and a soy-based food. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4977	dietary epidemiology of essential tremor: meat consumption and meat cooking practices
med-4978	biomonitoring of urinary metabolites of 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (phip) following human consumption of cooked chicken. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4979	one-year study on the variation of carotenoid antioxidant substances in living human skin: influence of dietary supplementation and stress factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4980	detection of fecal residue on poultry carcasses by laser-induced fluorescence imaging. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4981	one-year study on the variation of carotenoid antioxidant substances in living human skin: influence of dietary supplementation and stress factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4982	a low-fat vegan diet and a conventional diabetes diet in the treatment of type 2 diabetes: a randomized, controlled, 74-wk clinical trial
med-4983	meat intake and mortality: a prospective study of over half a million people
med-4984	vegetarian and vegan diets in type 2 diabetes management. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4985	a low-fat vegan diet and a conventional diabetes diet in the treatment of type 2 diabetes: a randomized, controlled, 74-wk clinical trial
med-4986	type of vegetarian diet, body weight, and prevalence of type 2 diabetes
med-4987	the safety of rosiglitazone in the treatment of type 2 diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4988	type of vegetarian diet, body weight, and prevalence of type 2 diabetes
med-4989	effect of a high nutrient density diet on long-term weight loss: a retrospective chart review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4990	type of vegetarian diet, body weight, and prevalence of type 2 diabetes
med-4991	bean consumption is associated with greater nutrient intake, reduced systolic blood pressure, lower body weight, and a smaller waist circumference ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4992	determination of bisphenol a and bisphenol b residues in canned peeled tomatoes by reversed-phase liquid chromatography. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4993	effects of a low-salt diet on flow-mediated dilatation in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4994	who benefits most from the cardioprotective properties of alcohol consumption--health freaks or couch potatoes? - pubmed - ncbi
med-4995	salicylic acid sans aspirin in animals and man: persistence in fasting and biosynthesis from benzoic acid
med-4996	from the cover: caloric restriction improves memory in elderly humans
med-4997	vegetarian diet affects genes of oxidative metabolism and collagen synthesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-4998	curcumin exerts antidifferentiation effect through ampkalpha-ppar-gamma in 3t3-l1 adipocytes and antiproliferatory effect through ampkalpha-cox-2 i... - pubmed - ncbi
med-4999	curcumin, demethoxycurcumin and bisdemethoxycurcumin differentially inhibit cancer cell invasion through the down-regulation of mmps and upa. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5000	effect of cinnamon and turmeric on urinary oxalate excretion, plasma lipids, and plasma glucose in healthy subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5001	curcumin as a possible lead compound against hormone-independent, multidrug-resistant breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5002	high tofu intake is associated with worse memory in elderly indonesian men and women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5003	genistein inhibits differentiation of primary human adipocytes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5004	weight gain over 5 years in 21,966 meat-eating, fish-eating, vegetarian, and vegan men and women in epic-oxford. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5005	increased prevalence of constipation in pre-school children is attributable to under-consumption of plant foods: a community-based study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5006	will all americans become overweight or obese? estimating the progression and cost of the us obesity epidemic. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5007	plasma adiponectin concentrations are associated with body composition and plant-based dietary factors in female twins. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5008	bariatric surgery in pediatrics--is it time? - pubmed - ncbi
med-5009	symptomatic efficacy of avocado-soybean unsaponifiables (asu) in osteoarthritis (oa) patients: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5010	chemopreventive characteristics of avocado fruit. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5011	effects of av119, a natural sugar from avocado, on malassezia furfur invasiveness and on the expression of hbd-2 and cytokines in human keratinocytes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5012	the cholesterol-lowering effect of coconut flakes in humans with moderately raised serum cholesterol. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5013	impairment of endothelial function--a possible mechanism for atherosclerosis of a high-fat meal intake. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5014	dietary intake and the risk of coronary heart disease among the coconut-consuming minangkabau in west sumatra, indonesia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5015	the intravenous use of coconut water. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5016	effects of dietary coconut oil, butter and safflower oil on plasma lipids, lipoproteins and lathosterol levels. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5017	association between betel-nut chewing and chronic kidney disease in men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5018	american academy of pediatrics recommendations on the effects of early nutritional interventions on the development of atopic disease
med-5019	cancer chemopreventive potential of apples, apple juice, and apple components. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5020	phytochemicals of apple peels: isolation, structure elucidation, and their antiproliferative and antioxidant activities. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5021	mechanisms of star fruit-induced acute renal failure. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5022	severe lactic acidosis associated with juice of the mangosteen fruit garcinia mangostana. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5023	green algal infection in a human. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5024	disseminated chlorellosis in a dog. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5025	detection of the hepatotoxic microcystins in 36 kinds of cyanobacteria spirulina food products in china. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5026	fruit, vegetable, and fish consumption and heart rate variability: the veterans administration normative aging study
med-5027	diet and risk of ischemic heart disease in india. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5028	food groups and renal cell carcinoma: results from a case-control study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5029	control of head lice with a coconut-derived emulsion shampoo. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5030	association of sleep duration with mortality from cardiovascular disease and other causes for japanese men and women: the jacc study
med-5031	sleep habits and susceptibility to the common cold
med-5032	processed meats and risk of childhood leukemia (california, usa). - pubmed - ncbi
med-5033	cancer is a preventable disease that requires major lifestyle changes
med-5034	cured and broiled meat consumption in relation to childhood cancer: denver, colorado (united states) - pubmed - ncbi
med-5035	meat and fish consumption and cancer in canada. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5036	meta-analysis of long-term mobile phone use and the association with brain tumours. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5037	does an extract of carob (ceratonia siliqua l.) have chemopreventive potential related to oxidative stress and drug metabolism in human colon cells? - pubmed - ncbi
med-5038	chocolate, lifestyle, and health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5039	cocoa and cardiovascular health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5040	acute dark chocolate and cocoa ingestion and endothelial function: a randomized controlled crossover trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5041	does flavanol intake influence mortality from nitric oxide-dependent processes? ischemic heart disease, stroke, diabetes mellitus, and cancer in panama
med-5042	flavanols, the kuna, cocoa consumption, and nitric oxide
med-5043	hibiscus sabdariffa l. extracts inhibit the mutagenicity in microsuspension assay and the proliferation of hela cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5044	anti-genotoxic effect of ocimum sanctum l. extract against cyproterone acetate induced genotoxic damage in cultured mammalian cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5045	suppressive effects of selected food phytochemicals on cd74 expression in nci-n87 gastric carcinoma cells
med-5046	common tea formulations modulate in vitro digestive recovery of green tea catechins. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5047	the association between concentrations of green tea and blood glucose levels
med-5048	effect of green tea and (-)-epigallocatechin gallate on ethanol-induced toxicity in hepg2 cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5049	association between soy and green tea (camellia sinensis) diminishes hypercholesterolemia and increases total plasma antioxidant potential in dysli... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5050	l-theanine, a natural constituent in tea, and its effect on mental state. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5051	can green tea do that? a literature review of the clinical evidence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5052	can green tea do that? a literature review of the clinical evidence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5053	artificial sweetener consumption and urinary tract tumors in cordoba, argentina. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5054	the potential toxicity of artificial sweeteners. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5055	a critical review of the genetic toxicity of steviol and steviol glycosides. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5056	total antioxidant content of alternatives to refined sugar. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5057	the effects of high fructose syrup. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5058	sucrose and behavioral problems. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5059	evaluation of certain food additives. seventy-first report of the joint fao/who expert committee on food additives. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5060	domestic and farm-animal exposures and risk of non-hodgkin lymphoma in a population-based study in the san francisco bay area
med-5061	humans have antibodies reactive with bovine leukemia virus. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5062	food additives and hyperactive behaviour in 3-year-old and 8/9-year-old children in the community: a randomised, double-blinded, placebo-controlled... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5063	food additives and hyperactivity
med-5064	consumption of brussels sprouts protects peripheral human lymphocytes against 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (phip) and oxidative ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5065	anthocyanin-rich grape extract blocks breast cell dna damage. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5066	influence of a diet very high in vegetables, fruit, and fiber and low in fat on prognosis following treatment for breast cancer
med-5067	identification of anthocyanins in the liver, eye, and brain of blueberry-fed pigs. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5068	lycopene-rich treatments modify noneosinophilic airway inflammation in asthma: proof of concept. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5069	from beans to berries and beyond: teamwork between plant chemicals for protection of optimal human health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5070	berry extracts exert different antiproliferative effects against cervical and colon cancer cells grown in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5071	identification of anthocyanins in the liver, eye, and brain of blueberry-fed pigs. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5072	lycopene-rich treatments modify noneosinophilic airway inflammation in asthma: proof of concept. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5073	polyphenols and antioxidant properties of almond skins: influence of industrial processing. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5074	effects of microwave cooking conditions on bioactive compounds present in broccoli inflorescences. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5075	effect of meal composition and cooking duration on the fate of sulforaphane following consumption of broccoli by healthy human subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5076	effects of different cooking methods on nutritional and physicochemical characteristics of selected vegetables. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5077	chemical, microbial and physical evaluation of commercial bottled waters in greater houston area of texas. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5078	mutagenic and antimutagenic effects of methanol extracts of unfermented and fermented black soybeans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5079	pinto bean consumption reduces biomarkers for heart disease risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5080	phytochemicals of black bean seed coats: isolation, structure elucidation, and their antiproliferative and antioxidative activities. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5081	raisins and additional walking have distinct effects on plasma lipids and inflammatory cytokines
med-5082	anti-cancer properties of phenolics from apple waste on colon carcinogenesis in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5083	a systematic screening of total antioxidants in dietary plants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5084	several culinary and medicinal herbs are important sources of dietary antioxidants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5085	factors dominating adhesion of nacl onto potato chips. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5086	a prospective study of dietary acrylamide intake and the risk of endometrial, ovarian, and breast cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5087	acrylamide exposure and incidence of breast cancer among postmenopausal women in the danish diet, cancer and health study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5088	mitigation strategies to reduce acrylamide formation in fried potato products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5089	dietary acrylamide intake and the risk of renal cell, bladder, and prostate cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5090	associations between meat consumption and the prevalence of degenerative arthritis and soft tissue disorders in the adventist health study, califor... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5091	essential n-3 fatty acids in pregnant women and early visual acuity maturation in term infants. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5092	visual acuity and cognitive outcomes at 4 years of age in a double-blind, randomized trial of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid-supplemented in... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5093	maternal consumption of a docosahexaenoic acid-containing functional food during pregnancy: benefit for infant performance on problem-solving but n... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5094	first record of human infection with the tapeworm diphyllobothrium nihonkaiense in north america. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5095	bioequivalence of docosahexaenoic acid from different algal oils in capsules and in a dha-fortified food. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5096	very low n-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid status in austrian vegetarians and vegans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5097	fish consumption, methylmercury and child neurodevelopment
med-5098	a risk-benefit analysis of french high fish consumption: a qaly approach. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5099	nutrient and methyl mercury exposure from consuming fish. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5100	public health guidance on cardiovascular benefits and risks related to fish consumption
med-5101	nutrient and contaminant tradeoffs: exchanging meat, poultry, or seafood for dietary protein. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5102	simulated impact of a fish based shift in the population n--3 fatty acids intake on exposure to dioxins and dioxin-like compounds. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5103	brominated flame retardants in us food. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5104	brominated flame retardants in us food. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5105	dioxins, dibenzofurans, dioxin-like pcbs, and dde in u.s. fast food, 1995. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5106	milk consumption and acne in teenaged boys
med-5107	diet and acne. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5108	effective heat inactivation of mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis in raw milk contaminated with naturally infected feces
med-5109	microbial and sensory changes throughout the ripening of prato cheese made from milk with different levels of somatic cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5110	applying morphologic techniques to evaluate hotdogs: what is in the hotdogs we eat? - pubmed - ncbi
med-5111	dietary factors and breast cancer risk: a case control study among a population in southern france. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5112	legume and soy food intake and the incidence of type 2 diabetes in the shanghai women’s health study
med-5113	effectiveness of a soy-based compared with a traditional low-calorie diet on weight loss and lipid levels in overweight adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5114	epidemiology of soy exposures and breast cancer risk
med-5115	genistein genotoxicity: critical considerations of in vitro exposure dose. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5116	dietary flavonoid intake and breast cancer survival among women on long island. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5117	plasma isoflavone level and subsequent risk of breast cancer among japanese women: a nested case-control study from the japan public health center-... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5118	effect of two types of soy milk and dairy milk on plasma lipids in hypercholesterolemic adults: a randomized trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5119	high levels of carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in mate drinks. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5120	l-theanine intervention enhances human gammadeltat lymphocyte function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5121	antiproliferative and apoptotic effects of chamomile extract in various human cancer cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5122	high levels of carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in mate drinks. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5123	tea or coffee? a case study on evidence for dietary advice. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5124	egg consumption and cardiovascular disease and mortality the physicians' health study
med-5125	whole-grain consumption is associated with a reduced risk of noncardiovascular, noncancer death attributed to inflammatory diseases in the iowa wom... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5126	pathogen detection, testing, and control in fresh broccoli sprouts
med-5127	sulforaphane mobilizes cellular defenses that protect skin against damage by uv radiation
med-5128	low vitamin b-12 status and risk of cognitive decline in older adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5129	modern society and prospects of low vitamin b12 intake. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5130	schizophrenia-like psychotic episode precipitated by cobalamin deficiency. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5131	vitamin b12 sources and bioavailability. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5132	role of vitamin b12 in depressive disorder--a case report. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5133	[floppy baby with macrocytic anemia and vegan mother]. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5134	complementary feeding: a commentary by the espghan committee on nutrition. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5135	west syndrome in an infant with vitamin b12 deficiency in the absence of macrocytic anaemia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5136	mortality in randomized trials of antioxidant supplements for primary and secondary prevention: systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5137	black pepper and its pungent principle-piperine: a review of diverse physiological effects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5138	consensus meeting: monosodium glutamate - an update. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5139	aspartame bioassay findings portend human cancer hazards. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5140	the effect of meat consumption on body odor attractiveness. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5141	iq in childhood and vegetarianism in adulthood: 1970 british cohort study
med-5142	irreversible subacute sclerotic combined degeneration of the spinal cord in a vegan subject. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5143	methanol extract of the seaweed gloiopeltis furcata induces g2/m arrest and inhibits cyclooxygenase-2 activity in human hepatocarcinoma hepg2 cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5144	arsenic in seaweed--forms, concentration and dietary exposure. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5145	comparative fracture risk in vegetarians and nonvegetarians in epic-oxford. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5146	plasma ldl and hdl cholesterol and oxidized ldl concentrations are altered in normo- and hypercholesterolemic humans after intake of different leve... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5147	immune effects of cocoa procyanidin oligomers on peripheral blood mononuclear cells. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5148	effects of low habitual cocoa intake on blood pressure and bioactive nitric oxide: a randomized controlled trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5149	continuous intake of polyphenolic compounds containing cocoa powder reduces ldl oxidative susceptibility and has beneficial effects on plasma hdl-c... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5150	sustained increase in flow-mediated dilation after daily intake of high-flavanol cocoa drink over 1 week. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5151	the emerging role of flavonoid-rich cocoa and chocolate in cardiovascular health and disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5152	aging and vascular responses to flavanol-rich cocoa. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5153	acute effects of high-fat meals enriched with walnuts or olive oil on postprandial endothelial function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5154	whole-grain intake is associated with body mass index in college students. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5155	effect of a daily supplement of soy protein on body composition and insulin secretion in postmenopausal women
med-5156	overview of antibacterial, antitoxin, antiviral, and antifungal activities of tea flavonoids and teas. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5157	herbal does not mean innocuous: ten cases of severe hepatotoxicity associated with dietary supplements from herbalife products. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5158	association between consumption of herbalife nutritional supplements and acute hepatotoxicity. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5159	cannabis use and risk of lung cancer: a case-control study
med-5160	antioxidant, antimutagenic, and antitumor effects of pine needles (pinus densiflora). - pubmed - ncbi
med-5161	dietary intakes of flavonols and flavones and coronary heart disease in us women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5162	antimutagenic effect of broccoli flower head by the ames salmonella reverse mutation assay. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5163	hepatitis induced by noni juice from morinda citrifolia: a rare cause of hepatotoxicity or the tip of the iceberg? - pubmed - ncbi
med-5164	dietary putrescine (1,4-diaminobutane) influences recovery of turkey poults challenged with a mixed coccidial infection. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5165	watermelon consumption increases plasma arginine concentrations in adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5166	cranberry and blueberry: evidence for protective effects against cancer and vascular diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5167	endocrine disruptors and hypospadias: role of genistein and the fungicide vinclozolin. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5168	a maternal vegetarian diet in pregnancy is associated with hypospadias. the alspac study team. avon longitudinal study of pregnancy and childhood. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5169	reduction of faecal coliform, coliform and heterotrophic plate count bacteria in the household kitchen and bathroom by disinfection with hypochlori... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5170	microbiological quality of sushi from sushi bars and retailers. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5171	incidence of enterohemorrhagic escherichia coli, escherichia coli o157, salmonella, and listeria monocytogenes in retail fresh ground beef, sprouts... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5172	the effects of spirulina on allergic rhinitis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5173	acute rhabdomyolysis caused by spirulina (arthrospira platensis). - pubmed - ncbi
med-5174	pilot evaluation of flaxseed for the management of hot flashes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5175	nutrition and lifestyle in relation to bowel movement frequency: a cross-sectional study of 20630 men and women in epic-oxford. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5176	effects of dietary flaxseed lignan extract on symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5177	pilot evaluation of flaxseed for the management of hot flashes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5178	dietary flaxseed lignan extract lowers plasma cholesterol and glucose concentrations in hypercholesterolaemic subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5179	dietary supplementation with flaxseed oil lowers blood pressure in dyslipidaemic patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5180	dietary lignan intakes and risk of breast cancer by tumor estrogen receptor status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5181	a diet high in fruits and low in meats reduces the risk of colorectal adenomas. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5182	dietary fibre and risk of breast cancer in the uk women's cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5183	diet and risk of ovarian cancer in the california teachers study cohort
med-5184	dietary lignan intakes and risk of breast cancer by tumor estrogen receptor status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5185	food intake and risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin in a community: the nambour skin cancer cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5186	nutritional factors in relation to endometrial cancer: a report from a population-based case-control study in shanghai, china
med-5187	effects of a low-fat, high-fiber diet and exercise program on breast cancer risk factors in vivo and tumor cell growth and apoptosis in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5188	meat intake and bladder cancer risk in 2 prospective cohort studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5189	adolescent milk fat and galactose consumption and testicular germ cell cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5190	dietary mutagen exposure and risk of pancreatic cancer
med-5191	animal food intake and cooking methods in relation to endometrial cancer risk in shanghai
med-5192	a prospective study of dietary calcium, dairy products and prostate cancer risk (finland). - pubmed - ncbi
med-5193	plasma and erythrocyte biomarkers of dairy fat intake and risk of ischemic heart disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5194	childhood dairy intake and adult cancer risk: 65-y follow-up of the boyd orr cohort. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5195	meat consumption and risk of breast cancer in the uk women's cohort study
med-5196	dairy products and risk of parkinson’s disease
med-5197	cooked meat and risk of breast cancer--lifetime versus recent dietary intake. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5198	why do african americans get more colon cancer than native africans? - pubmed - ncbi
med-5199	amount and fate of egg protein escaping assimilation in the small intestine of humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5200	shifting from a conventional diet to an uncooked vegan diet reversibly alters fecal hydrolytic activities in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5201	products of the colonic microbiota mediate the effects of diet on colon cancer risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5202	synthesis and stability study of a new major metabolite of γ-hydroxybutyric acid
med-5203	diet and cell growth modulation by ammonia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5204	relevance of protein fermentation to gut health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5205	meat-related compounds and colorectal cancer risk by anatomical subsite
med-5206	udp-glucuronosyltransferases: a family of detoxifying enzymes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5207	fecal bacterial beta-glucuronidase: control by diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5208	rarity of colon cancer in africans is associated with low animal product consumption, not fiber. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5209	fried-potato diet causes vitamin a deficiency in an autistic child. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5210	prevalence of xerophthalmia among malnourished children in rural ethiopia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5211	is whole-body hydration an important consideration in dry eye? - pubmed - ncbi
med-5212	surgical punctal occlusion with a high heat-energy releasing cautery device for severe dry eye with recurrent punctal plug extrusion. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5213	dry eye disease treatment: a systematic review of published trials and a critical appraisal of therapeutic strategies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5214	the epidemiology of dry eye disease: report of the epidemiology subcommittee of the international dry eye workshop (2007). - pubmed - ncbi
med-5215	a review of the complications of lacrimal occlusion with punctal and canalicular plugs. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5216	prevalence of vitamin a deficiency in south asia: causes, outcomes, and possible remedies
med-5217	tear fluid osmolarity as a potential marker of hydration status. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5218	influence of diet on tear function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5219	the antiaging approach for the treatment of dry eye. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5220	the economic burden of dry eye disease in the united states: a decision tree analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5221	keratomalacia. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5222	pharmaceutical and herbal products that may contribute to dry eyes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5223	post-lasik tear dysfunction and dysesthesia
med-5224	safety and efficacy of cyclosporine in the treatment of chronic dry eye
med-5225	vegetarian diet improves insulin resistance and oxidative stress markers more than conventional diet in subjects with type 2 diabetes
med-5226	effect of diet on excretion of estrogens in pre- and postmenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5227	inflammatory mediators are induced by dietary glycotoxins, a major risk factor for diabetic angiopathy
med-5228	phytochemicals and their impact on adipose tissue inflammation and diabetes. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5229	meat consumption as a risk factor for type 2 diabetes
med-5230	dietary fiber, weight gain, and cardiovascular disease risk factors in young adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5231	plant-based foods as a source of lipotropes for human nutrition: a survey of in vivo studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5232	reactive oxygen species have a causal role in multiple forms of insulin resistance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5233	fatty acid-induced inflammation and insulin resistance in skeletal muscle and liver. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5234	inflammatory mediators are induced by dietary glycotoxins, a major risk factor for diabetic angiopathy
med-5235	meat consumption, diabetes, and its complications. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5236	association between dietary meat consumption and incident type 2 diabetes: the epic-interact study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5237	mtor: from growth signal integration to cancer, diabetes and ageing
med-5238	persistent organic pollutants and diabetes: a review of the epidemiological evidence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5239	leucine signaling in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes and obesity
med-5240	orally absorbed reactive glycation products (glycotoxins): an environmental risk factor in diabetic nephropathy
med-5241	coffee, tea, and the risk of hip fracture: a meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5242	caffeine intake and its association with urinary incontinence in united states men: results from national health and nutrition examination surveys ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5243	coffee consumption and risk of fractures: a systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5244	effects of habitual coffee consumption on cardiometabolic disease, cardiovascular health, and all-cause mortality. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5245	effect of decaffeination of coffee or tea on gastro-oesophageal reflux. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5246	the effect of caffeine on intraocular pressure: a systematic review and meta-analysis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5247	caffeine consumption and the risk of primary open - angle glaucoma: a prospective cohort study
med-5248	atrial fibrillation associated with chocolate intake abuse and chronic salbutamol inhalation abuse. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5249	coffee and its consumption: benefits and risks. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5250	a meta-analysis of prospective studies of coffee consumption and mortality for all causes, cancers and cardiovascular diseases. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5251	heavy coffee drinking and epilepsy. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5252	caffeine does not increase the risk of atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5253	tea consumption didn’t modify the risk of fracture: a dose–response meta-analysis of observational studies
med-5254	caffeine and urinary incontinence in us women
med-5255	caffeine intake and atrial fibrillation incidence: dose response meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5256	no association of coffee consumption with gastric ulcer, duodenal ulcer, reflux esophagitis, and non-erosive reflux disease: a cross-sectional study of 8,013 healthy subjects in japan
med-5257	tea consumption and cardiovascular disease risk. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5258	association of coffee drinking with total and cause-specific mortality
med-5259	association of coffee consumption with all-cause and cardiovascular disease mortality
med-5260	phenolic content of virgin olive oil improves ischemic reactive hyperemia in hypercholesterolemic patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5261	differential effects of two isoenergetic meals rich in saturated or monounsaturated fat on endothelial function in subjects with type 2 diabetes
med-5262	effect of a mediterranean-style diet on endothelial dysfunction and markers of vascular inflammation in the metabolic syndrome: a randomized trial. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5263	postprandial anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects of extra virgin olive oil. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5264	brachial artery ultrasound: a noninvasive tool in the assessment of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5265	effect of dietary antioxidants on postprandial endothelial dysfunction induced by a high-fat meal in healthy subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5266	changes in flow-mediated brachial artery vasoactivity with lowering of desirable cholesterol levels in healthy middle-aged men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5267	mediterranean and low-fat diets improve endothelial function in hypercholesterolemic men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5268	olive oil intake and chd in the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition spanish cohort. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5269	olive, soybean and palm oils intake have a similar acute detrimental effect over the endothelial function in healthy young subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5270	diabetes and the mediterranean diet: a beneficial effect of oleic acid on insulin sensitivity, adipocyte glucose transport and endothelium-dependen... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5271	the postprandial effect of components of the mediterranean diet on endothelial function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5272	chronic effects of a high-fat diet enriched with virgin olive oil and a low-fat diet enriched with alpha-linolenic acid on postprandial endothelial... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5273	differential anti-inflammatory effects of phenolic compounds from extra virgin olive oil identified in human whole blood cultures. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5274	olive oil polyphenols decrease blood pressure and improve endothelial function in young women with mild hypertension. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5275	absence of postprandial surge in coronary blood flow distal to significant stenosis: a possible mechanism of postprandial angina. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5276	8:45-90:00. the influence of a high fat meal compared to an olestra meal on coronary artery endothelial dysfunction by rubidium (rb)-82 positron em... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5277	effect of fat and carbohydrate consumption on endothelial function. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5278	brachial artery ultrasound: a noninvasive tool in the assessment of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5279	impairment of endothelial function after a high-fat meal in patients with coronary artery disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5280	transient triglyceridemia decreases vascular reactivity in young, healthy men without risk factors for coronary heart disease. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5281	the vascular endothelium and human diseases
med-5282	postprandial angina pectoris: clinical and angiographic correlations. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5283	chocolate/cocoa and human health: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5284	habitual chocolate consumption may increase body weight in a dose-response manner
med-5285	cocoa, blood pressure, and cardiovascular health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5286	dark chocolate: an obesity paradox or a culprit for weight gain? - pubmed - ncbi
med-5287	candy consumption was not associated with body weight measures, risk factors for cardiovascular disease, or metabolic syndrome in us adults: nhanes... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5288	background music genre can modulate flavor pleasantness and overall impression of food stimuli. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5289	low vs. higher-dose dark chocolate and blood pressure in cardiovascular high-risk patients. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5290	by how much does dietary salt reduction lower blood pressure? iii--analysis of data from trials of salt reduction.
med-5291	dietary salt intake and hypertension
med-5292	blood pressure, sodium intake, and sodium related hormones in the yanomamo indians, a "no-salt" culture. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5293	a comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990–2010: a systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2010
med-5294	lipid profiles of yanomamo indians of brazil. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5295	dietary salt influences postprandial plasma sodium concentration and systolic blood pressure. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5296	the yanomami indians in the intersalt study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5297	double-blind randomised crossover trial of moderate sodium restriction in essential hypertension. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5298	should we eat less salt? - pubmed - ncbi
med-5299	the preventable causes of death in the united states: comparative risk assessment of dietary, lifestyle, and metabolic risk factors
med-5300	salt, volume and the prevention of hypertension. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5301	reductions in cardiovascular disease projected from modest reductions in dietary salt
med-5302	the increasing burden of hypertension in nigeria - can a dietary salt reduction strategy change the trend? - pubmed - ncbi
med-5303	the state of us health, 1990-2010: burden of diseases, injuries, and risk factors. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5304	regulation of brown adipose tissue development and white fat reduction by l-arginine. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5305	effect of spiced food on metabolic rate. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5306	brown adipose tissue, whole-body energy expenditure, and thermogenesis in healthy adult men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5307	anatomical locations of human brown adipose tissue
med-5308	recruited brown adipose tissue as an antiobesity agent in humans
med-5309	capsinoids and related food ingredients activating brown fat thermogenesis and reducing body fat in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5310	acute effects of capsaicin on energy expenditure and fat oxidation in negative energy balance
med-5311	dinitrophenol and obesity: an early twentieth-century regulatory dilemma. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5312	capsinoids and related food ingredients activating brown fat thermogenesis and reducing body fat in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5313	uptake in supraclavicular area fat ("usa-fat"): description on 18f-fdg pet/ct. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5314	the implication of brown adipose tissue for humans
med-5315	measurement of human brown adipose tissue volume and activity using anatomical mri and functional mri
med-5316	2,4-dinitrophenol (dnp): a weight loss agent with significant acute toxicity and risk of death
med-5317	identification and importance of brown adipose tissue in adult humans
med-5318	brown adipose tissue, whole-body energy expenditure, and thermogenesis in healthy adult men. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5319	nonpungent capsaicin analogs (capsinoids) increase energy expenditure through the activation of brown adipose tissue in humans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5320	"usa-fat": prevalence is related to ambient outdoor temperature-evaluation with 18f-fdg pet/ct. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5321	recruited brown adipose tissue as an antiobesity agent in humans
med-5322	characterization of bacteria, clostridia and bacteroides in faeces of vegetarians using qpcr and pcr-dgge fingerprinting. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5323	endocrine-disrupting chemicals and obesity development in humans: a review. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5324	effects of a high-fat meal on pulmonary function in healthy subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5325	vegetarian diets and blood pressure among white subjects: results from the adventist health study-2 (ahs-2)
med-5326	red meat and colon cancer: should we become vegetarians, or can we make meat safer? - pubmed - ncbi
med-5327	the association between dietary patterns and mental health in early adolescence. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5328	vegetarian diets and incidence of diabetes in the adventist health study-2
med-5329	rapid reduction of serum cholesterol and blood pressure by a twelve-day, very low fat, strictly vegetarian diet. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5330	effect of a single high-fat meal on endothelial function in healthy subjects. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5331	influencing public nutrition for non-communicable disease prevention: from community intervention to national programme--experiences from finland. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5332	quantification of butyryl coa:acetate coa-transferase genes reveals different butyrate production capacity in individuals according to diet and age. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5333	vegetarian diet affects genes of oxidative metabolism and collagen synthesis. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5334	protein-source tryptophan as an efficacious treatment for social anxiety disorder: a pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5335	does a vegan diet reduce risk for parkinson's disease? - pubmed - ncbi
med-5336	dietary patterns and depressive symptoms among japanese men and women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5337	intensive lifestyle changes may affect the progression of prostate cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5338	original articles: vegetarian compared with meat dietary protein source and phosphorus homeostasis in chronic kidney disease
med-5339	is escherichia coli urinary tract infection a zoonosis? proof of direct link with production animals and meat. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5340	renal function parameters of thai vegans compared with non-vegans. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5341	effects of a low-fat, high-fiber diet and exercise program on breast cancer risk factors in vivo and tumor cell growth and apoptosis in vitro. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5342	vegetarian diets are associated with healthy mood states: a cross-sectional study in seventh day adventist adults
med-5343	managing medical mistakes: ideology, insularity and accountability among internists-in-training. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5344	risk factors for myocardial infarction in women and men: insights from the interheart study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5345	five years after to err is human: what have we learned? - pubmed - ncbi
med-5346	resident duty-hour restrictions-who are we protecting?: aoa critical issues. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5347	effects of health care provider work hours and sleep deprivation on safety and performance. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5348	rye, lignans and human health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5349	rye bread consumption in early life and reduced risk of advanced prostate cancer
med-5350	randomised controlled short-term intervention pilot study on rye bran bread in prostate cancer. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5351	serum enterolactone and risk of breast cancer: a case-control study in eastern finland. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5352	intake of whole grain products and risk of breast cancer by hormone receptor status and histology among postmenopausal women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5353	cancer risks in second-generation immigrants to sweden. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5354	lignans and human health. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5355	intake of whole-grain products and risk of prostate cancer among men in the danish diet, cancer and health cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5356	rye whole grain and bran intake compared with refined wheat decreases urinary c-peptide, plasma insulin, and prostate specific antigen in men with ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5357	can rye intake decrease risk of human breast cancer?
med-5358	plasma and urinary alkylresorcinol metabolites as potential biomarkers of breast cancer risk in finnish women: a pilot study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5359	milk intake in early life and risk of advanced prostate cancer
med-5360	fruit, vegetable and antioxidant intakes are lower in older adults with depression
med-5361	a double-blind, randomized controlled clinical trial comparing eicosapentaenoic acid versus docosahexaenoic acid for depression. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5362	a systematic review and meta-analysis of dietary patterns and depression in community-dwelling adults. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5363	dietary patterns and depressive symptoms among japanese men and women. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5364	long chain n-3 fatty acids intake, fish consumption and suicide in a cohort of japanese men and women--the japan public health center-based (jphc) ... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5365	antioxidants as antidepressants: fact or fiction? - pubmed - ncbi
med-5366	association of the mediterranean dietary pattern with the incidence of depression: the seguimiento universidad de navarra/university of navarra fol... - pubmed - ncbi
med-5367	the relationship between plasma carotenoids and depressive symptoms in older persons
med-5368	suicide mortality in relation to dietary intake of n-3 and n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids and fish: equivocal findings from 3 large us cohort studies
med-5369	suicide mortality in the european union. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5370	long chain omega-3 fatty acids intake, fish consumption and mental disorders in the sun cohort study. - pubmed - ncbi
med-5371	omega-3 fatty acids for the treatment of depression: systematic review and meta-analysis
